prior viral infection determines the mode and severity of monkeypox virus abstract objectives monkeypox is a zoonotic virus in the genus orthopoxvirus. it is transmitted from animal to human, and between humans. the clinical presentations vary, starting with a prodrome phase to different skin findings and systemic complications. methods we present two distinctive cases of mpox co-infected with other viruses by clinical and histopathological analysis. results surprisingly, the mpox patient with a history of hcv developed different skin pathological characteristics. in contrast, patients living with hiv presenting with mpox had severe inflammatory cutaneous changes and distortion of the skin architecture. conclusion our findings strongly suggest that mpox infections likely occur in the presence of one or more previous other viral infections, and the prior infection with specific microbes determines the severity of mpox infection. introduction monkeypox is a zoonotic disease that was initially isolated in a laboratory in denmark from monkeys,,. the first human case of mpox was diagnosed in the democratic republic of congo in 1970. various mpox outbreaks occurred since 1970 worldwide, with scattered cases of mpox in central and west africa diagnosed between 1970-1980,,,. the most recent outbreak began in december 2021 and continuously spread in western countries, it is considered the largest one,,. further, this outbreak is commonly observed in men having sex with men, and it is a sexually related ailment. case presentation case 1 a 41-year-old homeless male with chronic hepatitis c presented to the hospital with a distinct rash on his left upper extremity that started a few days before. the patient states the rash was painful and mildly itchy and spread to his upper arm and back. the rash was preceded by 2 days of fever, fatigue, and myalgia. the patient had sexual intercourse with a new male partner.figure 1a patient with hepatitis c virus co-infected with monkeypox and a patient with hiv co-infected with monkeypox and histological analysis. figure showed raised vesiculopapular rash on the left upper extremity and back of the hand. figure showed pathological changes in the entire tissue sections with different levels of inflammation along with fibrotic changes. figure showed a cluster of neutrophils in the stratum corneum of the patient, a noticeable viral cytopathic consequence that affects the keratinocytes, including vacuolization, enlargement, and nuclear basophilia with a prominent granular layer and a pronounced basket-weave appearance of the horny layer. the leukocytic interface is rich in inflammatory cells and predominately with deep epidermal apoptosis. the subepidermal bulla was festooned by the epidermal papilla. epidermal pallor in the stratum corneum showed hyperkeratosis, and dyskeratotic keratinocytes. figure showed pathological cellular changes in the skin at 40x magnification. the cells are characterized by round nuclei, surrounded by intracytoplasmic edema. figure showed different stages of diffused skin rash and most of the rash was characterized by a vesiculopapular pattern. figure was the cross-section of the skin with severe inflammatory changes and thinning of the epidermal layer. figure showed novel cells, characterized by duplicated kissing nuclei and the bullae filled with severe inflammatory cells and eosinophilic inclusion body. figure showed severe hemorrhage in the dermis and hypodermis. also, severe apoptosis was noticed. figure showed various changes in the skin at 40x magnification, the inset shows few viable keratinocytes; hydropic degeneration; severe dermal congestion; and epidermal vacuolar degeneration.figure 1 physical examination showed raised vesiculopapular rash on his left upper extremity and back, associated with lymphadenopathy in the axilla and supraclavicular areas. no organomegaly or neurological deficits. vital signs are within normal consideration. laboratory results showed mild leukocytosis with predominant lymphocytes. the laboratory investigation including a comprehensive metabolic panel, renal function test, urinalysis, and liver function test is within normal range besides the elevation of alanine aminotransferase, and aspartate transaminase. the liver ultrasound was normal. tests for chlamydia/gonorrhea, hiv, herpes simplex, and syphilis are negative. the patient was diagnosed with mpox via polymerase chain reaction, and the biopsy showed various histopathological changes. further, laboratory diagnosis showed hepatitis c antibody, and detectable viral load. case 2 a 32-year-old homosexual male with a past medical history of hiv presented to our clinic with a rash on his face, genitalia, and bilateral upper extremity. the patient admitted fever, fatigue, and sweats 4 days before the onset of the rash. the rash was severely diffused, mildly painful, and itchy. as per the patient, he is taking biktarvy for his hiv, his last checkup 2 months ago showed an undetectable viral load and cluster of differentiation 4 was within the normal range. physical examination showed diffused vesiculopapular rash accompanied by bilateral axillary and anterior cervical lymphadenopathy. the patient was diagnosed with mpox via pcr. the rest of his laboratory results for sexually transmitted diseases, urinalysis, comprehensive metabolic panel, and complete blood count are within normal consideration. further, the cbc showed slight leukocytosis with predominant lymphocytes. histopathology case 1 we found significant differences in the skin pathology in patients infected with the hepatitis c virus who developed acute mpox infection. the skin pathology showed a cluster of neutrophils in the stratum corneum. additionally, a prominent viral cytopathic effect in keratinocytes, vacuolization, enlargement, and nuclear basophilia with a prominent granular layer and a pronounced basket-weave appearance of the horny layer were detected. there is leukocytic interface dermatitis, which is rich in inflammatory cells, and upper layers of epidermal apoptosis. the subepidermal bulla was also identified with the festooning of the epidermal papilla. epidermal pallor in the stratum corneum, hyperkeratosis, dyskeratotic keratinocytes, and a superficial perivascular mixed inflammatory infiltrate in the dermis are also seen in this case. this patient has a mild inflammatory response mentioned previously. also, the red and black arrows point to distinct cellular changes that are normally not present in the upper epidermal layer. those cells are characterized by round nuclei, surrounded by intracytoplasmic edema. thus, the differential cells could be melanocytes, merkel's cells, versus others. also, the keratinocytes have different characteristics including degenerative changes and a few multinucleated keratinocytes. case 2 we observed differences in the skin pathology of patients infected with the mpox virus who had an earlier history of hiv infection. in this case, the histopathologic examination shows an epidermis with sheets of necrotic keratinocytes with adjacent neutrophil crust. hydropic degeneration, severe dermal congestion, and epidermal vacuolar degeneration were identified all over the skin. severe inflammation was noticed along with fibrosis and apoptotic cells. surprisingly, some odd cell types were observed in this case, and these cells are characterized by duplicated kissing nuclei. the classic picture of mpox does not have such cells, also we have not noted such cellular changes in prior cutaneous viral infections. further, bullae filled with severe inflammatory cells and eosinophilic inclusion bodies were also noticed. moreover, we found an accumulation of red blood cells, which indicates severe vasodilation and bleeding in that area. this may be related to inflammatory cytokines, endothelial nitrite, and other vasodilators. furthermore, spongiosis, the presence of multiple bullae in the epidermis and dermis, and the presence of an eosinophilic body were detected, and notably, the stratum corneum was very thin in this patient. discussion histopathology of skin from these two cases shares few similarities with the classical histopathological changes during acute infection with mpox, but there is a cellular defect noticed among both patients that were not observed in the classical version of histopathological alterations in any of these viruses,,,,. we found significant differences in the skin histopathology of patients infected with hcv who developed acute mpox infection. those differences are characterized by a cluster of neutrophils in the stratum corneum, viral cytopathic effect in keratinocytes, vacuolization, and so forth, as described previously in the histopathology section. however, the classical cutaneous changes in hcv infection alone showed accumulation of various inflammatory cells, but predominantly the lymphocytes, a few fibrinoid necroses of the dermal vessels, bullae, saw-tooth appearance of the epidermis, and epidermal pallor. further, hyperkeratosis, severe dyskeratotic keratinocytes, fibrotic changes, spongiosis, and architecture distortion were also observed in the patient infected with hcv alone. whereas the classical hiv skin findings consist of munro micro abscess, inflammatory cell accumulations, thin epidermis, parakeratosis, hyperkeratosis, mild spongiosis, bulla, and spindle cell proliferation. these are common cutaneous findings associated with various skin manifestations in patients living with hiv, which are distinctive from the findings associated with mpox infection alone. the classic skin findings of mpox during the acute infection showed bullae, spongiosis mild acanthosis with slight inflammatory cells within the epidermis. although, the junction of dermal-epidermal junction contains mixtures of inflammatory cells and some bullae. in the dermal layer, various mild to moderate inflammatory cells are seen in perieccrine and perivascular circulation. the involvement of eccrine was extended from acrosyringium, where few lymphocytes have shown exocytosis into the epithelium, to the eccrine coils. further, perivascular involvement is more around the superficial and deep layer of vascular supplies. moreover, edematous changes and degenerative ballooning of keratinocytes were also seen in the acute stage. rarely, few multinucleated keratinocytes subsisted, and guarnieri-type intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies are also observed. because we found these pathological changes less severe than that observed in patients who were infected with those viruses alone, further investigation is warranted with a large population. we observed significant differences in the skin pathology of patients infected with the mpox virus who had an earlier history of hiv infection or hcv infection. the histopathologic examination in our patient with hiv co-infected with mpox shows severe cellular and architectural changes that are distinct from the classical mpox, or hiv alone. however, the cutaneous manifestation of mpox co-infection with hcv displayed different pathological characteristics from the classical mpox or hcv, or hiv alone, and/or hiv co-infected with mpox. most importantly, the changes observed in mpox plus hcv are significantly less severe than those observed in these two conditions independently. however, the skin lesions are severe in the case of mpox with hiv co-infection, even when compared to their skin pathological changes independently. the pathophysiology of such changes in mpox co-infection with various viruses is unclear. gigante et al., found two different genomic families of mpox from nine distinctive patients in the united states of america in 2022; a cardinal variant named b.1, and an infrequent variant named a.2. genetic analysis of those variants demonstrated predominant guanine-to-adenine alterations within themes identified by apolipoprotein b editing complex, cytosine deaminase, a host anti-viral defence protein, which catalyzes single base pair mutation. these findings suggest that mpox evolution may have been determined by apobec3 activity, and additional mutations may emerge or exist among different outbreak patients. co-infectivity is a broad and complex mechanism. it has been previously reported that the hepatitis e virus co-infects individuals with hepatitis b virus despite the distinct genetic phenotype. although this co-infectivity has been shown to advance hepatitis b chronicity leading to fulminant hepatitis, the authors noted that co-infectivity also resolves the conditions,,, this is also can happen when hbv patients co-infected by the hepatitis d virus, the latter leads to severe liver injury. this phenomenon was supported by kilonzo et al., who documented that the hev inhibits hbv dna replication. however, in the case of the mpox virus, potential co-infection was demonstrated which leads to a progression of infectivity. precisely, khallafallah and grose, described that human herpesvirus-3 is a risk factor for the acquisition of the mpox virus. further, the authors noted that human herpes-3 facilitates the penetration of mpox through the skin, and these viruses share some similarities in terms of viremia with a cellular stress response leading to high levels of interleukin-6 production which may contribute to the severity of the infection,,,. additionally, murid herpesvirus-4 was shown to protect against mouse pneumovirus through the il-6 mechanism. our findings in the current study corroborated well with this observation that the skin changes in patients infected with hiv who had mpox showed a worsening inflammatory response. in contrast, our study on hcv and mpox co-infection clearly demonstrates that the mpox infection was resolved in the presence of hcv co-infection. although the reason for such a phenomenon is unclear, abouelasrar et al., reported that hcv infection significantly contributes to the elevation of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin -1, il-6, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha. such an increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines in the acute phase of infection and inflammation post-hcv further stimulates acute phase protein serum amyloid a. noteworthy, a rise in the saa level has been considered as a potential anti-viral since the saa specifically interacts with viral particles. however, saa could divert infectivity when functioning like apolipoprotein. this pattern is frequently seen during various viral infections which include human herpes-3, measles, mumps, cytomegaly virus, and rubella,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,. thus, it is possible that these protective mechanisms may have occurred in the current study. these mechanistic aspects will be explored in future studies.table 1mpox virus co-infection with another microorganism.table 1authorscases and co-infectionfonti et al.acute severe arthritis in hiv plus mpoxde sousa et al.human mpox co-infection with acute hivbížová et al.co-infection of syphilis and mpox in hiv positiveogoina et al.a retrospective study of 40 patients with mpox, the hiv individuals have more severe and prolonged illness as well as more secondary bacterial infection when compared with non-hiv individuals who had mpoxzambrano sánchez and moyanoa case of mpox co-infection with syphilis and hivnolasco et al.mpox co-infection with sars-cov-2 and hivzlámal et al.mpox co-infection with herpes simplex virus type 2 and hivhoff et al.varicella co-infection in patients with active mpoxsilva et al.acute hiv and mpox co-infectionhughes et al.coinfections of mpox and varicella zoster virusel-qushayri et al.covid-19 and mpox co-infectionprabaker et al.herpes simplex virus type 2 and mpox co-infectionmartins-filho et al.mpox and varicella zoster virus co-infectionramoni et al.syphilis and mpox co-infectionstephen et al.mpox and varicella zoster viruses co-infectionhoffmann et al.mpox virus infections among men with and without hivdesgranges et al.mpox virus co-infected with chlamydia trachomatis and neisseria gonorrheaeabdullgaffar and abdulrahmanmpox virus, herpes simplex virus, and cytomegalovirus skin coinfectionspaparizos et al.mpox virus plus secondary syphilis co-infection in an hiv-positive patientvidelefsky et al.herpes simplex virus type 2 and mpox co-infectionbrazão et al.mpox virus infection in hiv-1-co-infected patients previously vaccinated against smallpoxrizzo et al.concomitant diagnosis of sexually transmitted infections and mpox in patients attending a sexual health clinicmpox, monkeypox conclusion our findings collectively suggest that mpox infections likely occur in the presence of other viral infections and that the prior infection with specific microbes determines the severity of mpox infection. notably, mpox infectivity may be severe in the presence of a specific virus. in contrast, the infectivity may resolve in the presence of another type of virus. because nothing is currently known about the potential mechanisms involved in such differential infectivity, further research is warranted to determine the exact nature of the co-infection. declaration of competing interest all authors have completed icmje uniform disclosure form. dr. paidas is part of bioincept llc with stock options. the other authors have no conflicts of interest or competing interests to declare. funding this study was supported by the university of miami miller school of medicine research fund, muriel, murray & robert smith foundation covid-19 research fund, and the university of miami miller school of medicine team science research fund. ethical approval the authors are accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. this research has received all the required approvals. the patient has provided written informed consent and had no objections or comments regarding the publication of this case report and its content. acknowledgment we thank dr. ali snan, md, internist, larkin community hospital, department of internal medicine and infectious disease, miami, fl, usa, for assistance with histopathology. authors contributions arj, hh, and mjp conceived the study, hh, af, lm, eg, and ec performed biopsies, arj, af, hh, mjp, eaw, rrc, rr, and zfs conducted the histopathology analyzed the images, and wrote the paper.