preventing monkeypox outbreaks: focus on diagnosis, care, treatment, and vaccination abstract the first human case of monkeypox virus was reported in . in the years after human infection with mpox and human-to-human transmission was not widely observed, and more cases were seen in endemic areas. in that year, mpox spread was confirmed through the export of infected animals to other parts of the world. every few years, sporadic infections were reported in different parts of the world from human contamination and human-to-human transmission. in recent years, with the slow decline of the covid-pandemic, the outbreak of mpox was observed in many countries of the world. to deal with the spread of this viral infection, we need to know the ways to diagnose the infection, treat the infection, care for the patients, and implement a wide program of vaccination. currently, there are no specific drugs available for this virus, but according to previous studies related to smallpox, drugs such as tecovirimat, cidofovir, and brincidofovir, which were used for smallpox and other orthopoxviruses in the past, can be considered to deal with mpox. also, some vaccines such as jynneos, imvamune, and movihvax that have been used against smallpox can be useful to some extent in preventing mpox. introduction the first human infection caused by monkeypox was first confirmed in . until then, outbreaks of mpox had been observed among captive mammals. in careful laboratory investigations to find the latest cases of smallpox and people suspected of having smallpox to carry out smallpox eradication programs in west and central africa, several documented samples of mpox were identified and observed. with the identification of numerous new cases at that time, mpox received more attention than before. so hundreds of other cases of mpox were identified and confirmed by reference laboratories in central and west african countries. although the number of monkeypox cases was increasing, no human infection with mpox was reported in west africa from to . however, different waves of mpx outbreaks have been recorded in human populations and different countries. after the slow decline of the coronavirus disease disease in recent years, a large number of cases of mpx in humans have been identified and confirmed in different countries. the high prevalence of cases in non-endemic countries and the distance from the smallpox vaccination program have increased the concerns related to mpox. recent reports of large outbreaks of mpx in different countries have made mpox an emerging infectious pathogen of concern associated with significant mortality in humans. in the early years of mpx outbreaks and disease in humans, epidemiological studies conducted in the democratic republic of the congo estimated an annual incidence rate of mpx of .per people, defining mpx as a rare disease. however, recent estimates have shown that we are facing a sharp increase in the incidence of mpx, and the incidence rate has reached .per . the recent clinical data and the estimates made consider the mortality risk for smallpox to be small, but deaths related to mpx have been recorded in the basin and require more detailed investigations. logically, with the increase in the number of cases of sick people, the number of deaths also increases. from the time of the first reports until a few years ago, isolated and scattered cases of mpx in humans were reported. in the number of infected people suddenly increased significantly. in may many cases of mpx have been reported in spain, belgium, sweden, italy, and portugal in europe. similarly, there has been a report of human infection with mpx from canada in north america. in the same month of may two patients were identified in australia, both of which returned to australia from europe. as of late may several confirmed cases of mpx have been reported from germany, the netherlands, and the united kingdom. mpox, the causative agent of monkeypox disease, which is known as a zoonotic disease, is classified in the family poxviridae and genus orthopoxvirus. although mpox has been detected in different regions of the world in recent years, it is considered native to central and west african countries. all the viruses of this family have a double-stranded dna genome that encodes about proteins that are responsible for the biological activities of the virus, such as escaping from the immune system, pathogenicity, and diversity in the host and infecting cells. while mpox was first identified in monkeys and given this name, it infects many species of animals. mpox is capable of infecting a wide variety of nonhuman mammalian species, chickens, and domestic pigs, and rodents such as rats, mice, and squirrels. despite many studies on mpx and its pathogenesis in humans, many aspects related to this virus such as ways to detect the virus, precautions necessary to prevent the spread of the virus, treatment and care and reducing mortality, and immunization human population remain unclear. considering the spread of this virus in non-native areas, this question is removal whether with our current experiences and knowledge about monkeypox, we can deal with the wide spread of monkeypox. the purpose of writing this study is to know the methods of diagnosis, care, and treatment of patients for current infected cases and to investigate the role of available vaccines for immunization in critical times in the future. poxviruses viruses of the poxviridae family are all enveloped, brick-shaped, or oval-shaped with a length of –nm and a width of –nm. the surface membrane displays surface tubules or surface filaments. the combination of proteins and the coating of members of the poxviridae family give the virion a round appearance, and it is structurally bulky. their dna genome is surrounded by a protein core containing a set of enzymes involved in the replication and transcription of dna. these enzymes include rna polymerase, dna polymerase, and capping enzymes for mrna, which are unique among other viruses and enable the virus to reproduce in the cytoplasm. because of their large appearance, poxviruses were among the first viruses to be observed under a microscope. guarneri and paschen intracytoplasmic inclusions can be seen in squamous and visceral cells infected with poxviruses. these inclusions are somewhat characteristic of viruses, such as even henderson-peterson bodies seen in mcv. poxviruses have a complex life cycle due to their various infectious forms. their life cycle consists of enveloped and unenveloped virions, each of which is infectious. these viruses take their lipid coating from modified golgi membranes where specific viral polypeptides such as hemagglutinin are accumulated. orthopoxvirus, parapoxvirus, yatapoxvirus, and molosipoxvirus are genera belonging to the poxviridae family that infect humans. smallpox virus, vaccinia virus, cowpox virus, and mpox are in the orthopoxvirus genus, orf virus, pseudopox virus, and bovine papular stomatitis virus are in the parapox genus, tanapox virus and yaba monkey tumor virus are in the yatapox genus, and molluscum contagiosum virus is in the molluscipox genus, each of which is capable of infecting humans. until the last few years, vaccinia and mcv were among the most common viruses that infect humans, but in recent years, mpx infection has been increasing in human populations. some viruses of the poxviruses, such as variola and mcv, specifically infect humans. however, some members of the genus orthopoxvirus are zoonotic and cause diseases in humans, such as vaccinia, cowpox, mpx, and orf. for this reason, there are many studies related to the pathogenesis of smallpox and molluscum contagiosum. mcv causes common genital lesions in children and adults. skin lesions caused by this virus in immunocompromised people become a very widespread debilitating skin disease. based on previous studies, the mortality rate of smallpox is estimated to be –%, which leaves blindness and unsightly wounds in the survivors. the virus was deadly for years until the widespread use of the vaccine reduced smallpox cases and was eventually declared eradicated in by the world health organization. unlike smallpox and mcv, which only infect humans as their only host, mpox as another member of this family is a zoonotic virusmpox, which received more attention after its first case was identified in humans in . the increase in its spread in recent years has increased concerns after several years. many of the rodent genera suspected as possible reservoirs of the virus, including cricetomys, graphiurus, funisciurus, and heliosciurus, are found both in the forests of west africa and the congo basin. this diversity in the host plays a big role in the spread of the disease. in the study published by ramnarayan et al., they reported the infection of the members of a family including a father, mother, and a -day-old baby. the father of this family likely contracted mpox through a mouse killed by mpx, and he passed it on to the woman and his child. monkeypox epidemiology this virus was named monkeypox for the first time because the first case was observed in a macaque monkeys, and yet monkeys are not the original source of mpox. while the original origin of mpox is not definitively known, some small mammals and rodents have been attributed as the source of mpox. until the spread of mpox in recent years, it was rarely reported from human to human. however, human-to-human transmission is attributed to respiratory droplets or direct contact with mucous skin lesions of infected individuals. since may more than human cases of mpx have been reported in more than countries worldwide, making it the largest outbreak of mpx recorded to date. manifestations of mpx disease are similar to smallpox, but less severe. despite the outbreak of mpx in nigeria including many cases in savannah and urban areas, epidemiologic studies have shown that african rainforests are among the main reservoirs of the mpox. according to studies published in the first outbreak of mpx in the usa was reported after rodents were imported as pets from ghana, and eventually, confirmed cases were identified and reported that year. according to this case and other reported cases of the export of animals such as monkeys to non-endemic countries of mpx, most attention was paid to zoonotic transmission of this virus and human-to-human transmission was very limited. however, in september –in the uk, after the identification of three people infected with mpx who had a history of travel to nigeria, it was observed that a human-to-human hospital transmission and a family contagion occurred after hospitalization. these observations and the widespread of mpx in other parts of the world largely justify human-to-human transmission in mpx patients and will increase concerns. in most cases, there is no epidemiological link between patients infected with mpx and africa, and it can be inferred that human-to-human transmission has caused the spread of the virus in non-endemic areas. mutations and differences in strains cause epidemiological changes and changes in the spread of the virus. the pathogenic behavior of both types of mpox identified in central and west africa has been investigated in different species from rodents to primates. it has been reported that there are tangible differences between acuteness, the mortality ratio, and the rate of systemic release. to date, two main strains of the mpox have been identified in central and west africa, with the strain identified in central africa being associated with a more severe disease. unlike the central african strains, the strains observed in west africa had a lower tendency to spread from person to person. in general, genetic changes and the emergence of diverse species lead to obvious geographical differences in the prevalence of mpx. diagnosis, care, and treatment diagnosis early detection of infectious agents such as viruses is one of the priorities of health and care organizations. regarding virus infections, it is very important to find virus detection methods in controlling the epidemic and helping to treat patients. today, many diagnostic methods are used to identify the viral agents that cause the disease. enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, in situ hybridization, polymerase chain reaction, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, electron microscope, investigation of cytopathic effects, and biosensors are routinely used for detection worldwide. during the covid-pandemic, the need for fast and accurate virus detection methods was felt more than before. for this reason, many studies were conducted in connection with the identification of various markers for early and accurate identification of covid-. however, methods such as cell culture and electron microscopy are still used and important in the preparation of vaccines. today, viral culture has largely been replaced by nucleic acid amplification tests and antigen detection techniques. in viral infections, whose clinical symptoms are close to other diseases, especially infectious and viral diseases, the role of accurate diagnosis methods is more apparent. the clinical manifestations of mpx in humans are close to chickenpox ), and at least in children, it should be differentiated from chickenpox. after being exposed to the sick person, symptoms appear on average –days later. the first clinical signs of mpx are fever, headache, lymphadenopathy, and flu-like symptoms. in mpx disease, like chickenpox, there are also reports showing that fever and skin rashes are visible and affect most areas of the body, including the palms and feet. monkey pox disease is considered as a self-limiting disease, but in pregnant women, children and immunocompromised people, it may occur as a more severe disease. in some studies, it has been stated that mpx can be divided into two stages. the incubation period of the disease is approximately –days, and in the first stage, a multi-day prodromal period begins with fever, lymphadenopathy, similar to encephalitis, and the second stage is associated with skin lesions. skin lesions usually start as macular and go through papular, vesicular, pustular, and umbilical stages. the rash usually starts on the face and changes to the palms and soles of the feet. in some cases, the oropharyngeal mucosa is involved and painful. most skin lesions in the current outbreak of have been observed in the genital area or perineum. as with electron microscopy, culturing viruses for detection is associated with limitations and difficulties. finding suitable cells for virus replication, virus isolation, and the need for a laboratory with appropriate equipment are among these. however, cpe screening methods are used for some viruses. some studies have reported that mpox grows rapidly in cell culture and produces detectable cpe in rmk, bgm, a549, and mrc-cell lines in approximately days. however, methods such as cell culture and electron microscopy are still used and important in the preparation of vaccines. today, viral culture has largely been replaced by nucleic acid amplification tests and antigen detection techniques. the clinical manifestations of mpx in humans are close to chickenpox, and at least in children, it should be differentiated from chickenpox. the first clinical signs of mpx are smallpox, fever, headache, and prostration, and after being exposed to the sick person, symptoms appear on average to days later. in smallpox, there are also reports showing that fever and a skin rash are visible and affect most areas of the body, including the palms and soles. clinical manifestations in mpx are not specific, and in many viral diseases and even other nonviral infections, these clinical signs and symptoms can be observed. in some cases, especially early in the onset of clinical symptoms, this issue can make it difficult for doctors to distinguish mpx from other viral, bacterial, or other diseases with similar symptoms. therefore, accurate and fast laboratory diagnosis methods are of particular importance in such conditions. peiró-mestres et al have traced mpx dna in different samples from patients. in total, they observed mpx dna in saliva, rectal swab, nasopharyngeal swab, semen, urine, and feces samples. in all patients, the saliva sample contained mpx dna. this shows the importance of saliva sampling for laboratory diagnosis of the virus. they have also reported that in rectal swab samples and nasopharyngeal swab samples, the most identified cases were after saliva. however, many other studies emphasize the detection of mpox dna in skin rashes. in any case, this study confirms the presence of the virus in different samples, and in this way, the virus can be spread to others. the samples obtained from skin lesions, throat, blood, and urine of a patient suspected of having mpox can be performed with real-time pcr technique after dna extraction. real-time pcr has high sensitivity and specificity for detecting mpox and other viruses. it is difficult and expensive to equip all laboratories, especially in developing countries. however, the detection of viral dna in swabs taken from wounds and skin lesions of patients is the main strategy for diagnosing suspected cases of mpx. in the diagnosis of mpx, clinical and laboratory tests should be used, and mpx should be differentiated from other skin infections that cause rashes, such as chickenpox, measles, bacterial skin infections, scabies, syphilis, and even sensitivity to foreign substances. lymphadenopathy is one of the clinical manifestations of mpx that helps distinguish mpx from chickenpox. however, the infection can be confirmed by detecting the dna of the virus. pcr testing of skin lesion samples is preferable to pcr of blood samples in diagnosing mpox. because the virus only stays in the blood for a short time, detecting mpox dna in the blood is not definitive. also, information such as the time of onset of fever, the onset of skin lesions, the appearance of skin rashes, and the history of travel or contact with a dead animal can help interpret the test results. despite the recent increase in cases and with the increase in the number of people who have not traveled to endemic areas, it is useful to consider this issue and check the international travel status of patients or people who have been in contact with them in the days before the onset of symptoms. treatment the importance of antibody responses in protecting patients from poxvirus infections has been demonstrated in various studies. to date, the centers for disease control and prevention has emphasized only supportive care and has not announced a specific treatment for mpx, and antiviral drugs for mpx have not received final approval. supportive treatments such as maintenance of fluid and electrolyte balance, nutrition, symptomatic treatment with antipyretic/analgesic drugs, early identification of secondary infections, and prompt treatment with appropriate antimicrobial agents are recommended for the treatment of mpx disease. some treatments that were previously used to control and treat smallpox patients are also being investigated in some studies for their effectiveness in the treatment and control of mpx disease. tecovirimat, available as an oral capsule or an intravenous vial, is considered the first antiviral drug to treat smallpox. the new protocol maintained by the cdc allows emergency use of tecovirimat for non-variola infections such as patients with mpx. tecovirimate has an inhibitory effect on p37, which is a highly conserved protein among orthopoxviruses, preventing the formation of virions and their exit from the cell. finally, tecovirimate prevents the virus from spreading in the body by preventing the virus from leaving the infected cell. so far, there is no approved antiviral treatment for mpx. nevertheless, due to the small number of deaths reported due to this disease and the severity of the disease in some people, immunocompromised people, and pregnant women, antiviral treatment should still be one of the research options. currently, clinical studies are being conducted to investigate the effectiveness of this drug on mpx patients. table .some ongoing studies to investigate the effectiveness of tecovirimat in the treatment of monkeypoxnct numbernct05559099nct05534984nct05534165phase233dose3 to <kg: mg; to <kg: mg; to <kg: mg; to <kg: mg; to <kg:mg; ≥kg: mg25–kg: mg every h – d; –kg: mg every h – d; kg and over: mg every h – d600 mg – two times a dayparticipants450530120ages/sexchild, adult/allchild, adult/alladult/allinclusion criteriaconfirmed by pcr – patient has at least one active – nonpregnant – weight ≥ kgconfirmed or presumptive hmpox infection; hmpox illness of <days; at least one active; nonpregnant peopleweight ≥ kg, confirmed by pcr, culture, or antigen test, skin lesion, mucosal lesionrecruitment statusrecruitingrecruitingnot yet recruitingresponsible partyniaid/usaniaid/usamcgill university/canadantc number, national clinical trial; kg, kilogram; mg, milligram; d, day; h, hour; pcr, polymerase chain reaction; hmpox, human monkeypox virus; niaid, national institute of allergy and infectious diseases. cidofovir was used in medicine in as an injectable and topical antiviral drug mainly for the treatment of retinal infection caused by cytomegalovirus in hiv-infected patients. it has been shown in laboratory conditions that cidofovir may have an anti-smallpox effect and can be used in emergencies such as bioterror with smallpox. however, due to its abundant nephrotoxicity, it has been used less. brincidofovir is a modified form of cidofovir that has greatly reduced renal toxicity. brincidofovir is taken orally with higher inhibitory activity than cidofor against smallpox. brincidofovir is derived by conjugation with a lipid molecule to cidofovir. this binding and finding the lipid side of the drug facilitates binding to the cell membrane, and then entering the cells. when the drug enters the infected body, cidofovir is separated from the drug, phosphorylated, and converted into its active form. this drug inhibits the synthesis of viral dna that is carried out by the intermediary of viral dna polymerase. it can also act as a noncyclic nucleotide and attach itself to viral dna and in this way prevent viral dna synthesis and virus multiplication. as of june brincidofovir has been approved for the treatment of smallpox in the usa. many studies related to the effectiveness of brincidofovir and cidofovir in the treatment of mpx are not available; however, some studies have shown that brincidofovir can be effective against orthopoxvirus infections. it should also be noted that improper use of these drugs may cause drug-resistant strains. smee and his colleagues have stated in their study that there is a possibility of the emergence of cidofovir-resistant human orthopoxvirus infections that cannot be treated with cidofovir. more studies on the cidofovir-resistant mpox are needed to confirm this issue. to date, little evidence supports antiviral therapy with cidofovir and even tecavirimate for the treatment of severe cases of mpx. however, some studies have used cidofovir to treat severe cases of monkeypox, despite the small number of patients. in raccagni et al.’s study, no side effects and no significant changes in creatinine levels were reported, and they stated that no new symptoms were observed in patients after cidofovir administration. many studies have been conducted to investigate the effectiveness of immunoglobulin therapy on viral infections. until today, many cases of success of treatment with immunoglobulins in the control and treatment of viral diseases have been recorded and reported. nowadays, antibodies are prescribed routinely for some viral diseases. for example, when people who have been bitten by a dog go to the hospital, according to approved protocols, anti-rabies immunoglobulins are prescribed and injected after primary care. the fda has approved the use of vaccinia immune globulin intravenous for the treatment of complications from vaccinia vaccination. cdc has recommended a protocol that can be used to treat orthopoxviruses such as mpx in an outbreak of vigiv. however, there is still no information available about the effectiveness of vigiv for the treatment of mpx. therefore, no proven benefit of using vigiv in mpx patients in preventing severe infection has been documented. it is recommended that vigiv be used in persons with severe immunodeficiency in t-cell function who have been exposed to a sick person. in some studies, it has been shown that in the animal model of rhesus macaques, anti-vaccinia antibodies alone cannot prevent death caused by mpox infection. in other viral infections such as influenza and poliovirus, adequate amounts of antibodies induced by vaccination with killed virus vaccines have been shown to prevent severe diseases caused by influenza and polioviruses. the prerequisite for using antibodies is knowing the immunogenic identity of viral antigens. the identity of vaccinia immunogens is still not fully known to extract effective antibodies against poxviruses, especially mpx. however, some studies have reported some degree of protection against the lethal mpox challenge by antibodies raised against a single imv immunogen. the combination of eev immunogens with imv immunogens has also been reported to provide acceptable protection against severe mpx disease. these antigens can be the target of various studies to produce vaccines and antibodies to protect against mpox and other members of the orthopoxvirus genus. care due to their unique capabilities, viruses can create widespread epidemics. however, there are useful and reliable methods that, if used and followed properly, can prevent the occurrence of an epidemic or the further spread of the virus in society. applying methods to control and prevent the transmission of viruses in diseases that are capable of human-to-human transmission is more tangible than other viruses such as zoonotic viruses. many studies have reported that patients with mpx in their study did not have a history of traveling to endemic areas or being exposed to an infected animal. this emphasizes human-to-human transmission. our experience with the respiratory pandemic of covid-emphasizes the use of precautions and the application of appropriate methods to prevent the further spread of viral infections. in the face of covid-many countries used non-pharmacological interventions to reduce the spread of the disease, such as social distancing, school closures, “testing and isolating” symptomatic individuals, hand hygiene, respiratory etiquette, and environmental cleaning. the use of these methods not only played a role in the spread of covid-but also affected several infectious diseases based on studies. to overcome the spread of mpx, it is necessary to know the methods of transmission and pathogenesis of this virus. our understanding of the tropism and pathogenicity of mpox in humans is not complete, and most of what we know has been obtained from studies on animal models and studies on other orthopoxviruses. for example, in an animal model by studying macaques, it has been shown that these animal models are easily infected by the mucous membranes of the mouth and respiratory tract when exposed to aerosols, and the primary target of infection is the epithelial cells of the airways. it has been observed that in addition to skin lesions, secondary complications of infection such as gastroenteritis, pneumonia, encephalitis, and secondary bacterial skin infections have also occurred in people, which in addition to the severity of the disease, and increases the chance of transmission. although smallpox infection during the outbreak in the usa was assessed as a mild infection, reports of more severe manifestations involving the central nervous system, gastrointestinal tract, and respiratory tract are available from patients in the congo region, indicating the diverse behavior of the virus. for example, in a study that evaluated mpx patients, it was reported that nearly a third of the patients were hospitalized, and half of the children in this study were hospitalized in the intensive care unit. it is also reported in this study that patients with hypoalbuminemia followed by loss of digestive fluids had more severe disease manifestations. various studies have been conducted to identify the ways of mpox transmission. in addition to respiratory transmission and direct transmission through skin lesions, some studies have reported the detection of the virus in the semen of patients. this issue and the creation of multiple skin lesions in the genital area can strengthen transmission through sexual intercourse among people. in addition to the transmission through direct contact with lesions, it is transmitted through fomites or indirect contact with lesion material, such as virus-contaminated substrates. for this reason, in cases of hospitalization of patients, risk factors of transmission such as using the same equipment as an infected person and using a shared room and shared bed should be considered. due to the zoonosis of mpox and people’s acceptance of pets, the possibility of disease transmission through pets should also be considered. the possibility of transmission of mpox from humans to pets and vice versa is still not well understood. however, some studies have confirmed and reported evidence of transmission of mpox from humans to dogs. in studies published in the past years, it has been reported that wild animals such as rodents and primates are carriers of mpox in endemic areas. however, there are some reports of prairie dogs being infected in the usa and of caged mammals that have been in contact with imported infected animals infected with mpox in europe. in some studies, it has been reported that in some animals with monkey pox, the infection is asymptomatic. the wide range of species infected with mpox and its wide host range show that most animal species can be infected with mpox and should be considered important in the study of the epidemiological cycle of mpox. in the current outbreak of mpx in it has been observed that many infected individuals who are infected with the mpox are homosexual and bisexual men. despite all the mentioned cases, the transmission of mpox to a person requires long-term contact with the source of infection or the sick person. in cases where a person has to be exposed for a long time, the need for more monitoring and getting a vaccine as post-exposure prophylaxis has been recommended. among the cases of contact with a high chance of transmission, the following can be mentioned: – traveling and working in the patient’s room without using an n95 mask and eye protection. – repeated unprotected contact with the patient’s skin lesions. – sex and contact with body fluids such as the patient’s saliva. – contact with contaminated items and materials such as the clothes of an infected person. orthopoxviruses maintain their infectivity on inanimate surfaces for up to days. as a result, observing and applying disinfection methods plays an important role in controlling the transmission of these viruses. seventy percent ethanol, .% peracetic acid and –% a probiotic cleaner, sodium hypochlorite, % glutaraldehyde, and .% ortho-phthalaldehyde has the ability to inactivate orthopoxviruses. vaccination the first attempts at immunization are documented in the 4th century in china and india, which attempted to immunize healthy people against smallpox by inoculating a milder form. also, in edward jenner, after observing a mild disease of smallpox in dairy cows previously infected with cowpox, concluded that the use of cowpox can provide immunity against smallpox. several studies have been conducted in the past that have shown that people vaccinated with the smallpox vaccine are somewhat safe from mpx, and the disease caused in these people is much milder and the manifestations of the disease are very insignificant. these data show that finding an effective vaccine against smallpox, in addition to being effective in the mpx epidemic, will also help public health in the event of bioterrorism and intentional smallpox outbreaks. based on these data and documents, people vaccinated against smallpox at the time of mpx infection have less severe disease and have shown better protection against mpx. this issue and other documents since the time of edward jenner show that antibodies produced against viruses of this family can have a cross-effect. the same principles that edward jenner used from cowpox to vaccinate against smallpox. if this hypothesis is confirmed, it will be possible to protect communities against mpx and the dangers of smallpox bioterrorism by designing a vaccine at the same time. to confirm this issue, extensive studies are needed to confirm the effectiveness of available vaccines against different viruses of the pox family. with the outbreak of mpx, studies can be designed and helpful results can be obtained and hit two targets with one arrow. the majority of representatives of the world health assembly at the 64th meeting of this organization in may emphasized the elimination of the remaining stocks of variola virus. but it should be noted that by removing the storage source, there will be problems for conducting studies. due to the risks and possibilities of intentional use of smallpox, it has been reported that vaccination of a part of the population in the usa has been done, observing few cases of side effects in some people, such as people with immunodeficiency, who have not been vaccinated. also, the usa stopped mass vaccination in the early 1970s due to the observation of some complications and that the side effects outweighed the benefits in the absence of the smallpox threat. after smallpox was eradicated, smallpox vaccines were still being researched. even the development of the dryvax smallpox vaccine, which contains a live attenuated virus, was not well received by the public or the scientific community. considering the eradication of smallpox and the lack of widespread use of smallpox vaccines, it seems that the best option, considering the current conditions and the spread of mpx in many parts of the world, as well as the risk of the reappearance of smallpox caused by the vaccine, is to focus on production. and research in the field of mpx vaccines should be focused. currently, several types of researches are being conducted in the field of making and evaluating the efficacy of anti-monkeypox vaccines. table .clinical studies related to different vaccines and their effectiveness in preventing monkeypoxnct numbernct02977715nct05512949nct05562323vaccine nameimvamunejynneos movihvaxtype of vaccineattenuated live virus smallpox vaccinehighly attenuated strain of the poxvirus chorioallantois vaccinia virus ankaralive modified vaccinia virus ankaraphase32cohort/prospectiveparticipants1600210100ages/sex18 years and older/all18–year/all18 years and older/allinclusion criteriamales and nonpregnant females; healthcare personnel at risk of monkeypox infectionnonpregnant; stable state of healthhiv-negative and hiv-positive individualsrecruitment statusactive, not recruitingrecruitingrecruitingresponsible partycdcniaidthe fight aids foundationntc, national clinical trial; mva-bn, modified vaccinia ankara-bavarian nordic; hiv, human immunodeficiency virus; cdc, centers for disease control and prevention; niaid, national institute of allergy and infectious diseases. because smallpox vaccines are live attenuated vaccines, the use of these vaccines in immunocompromised individuals such as acquired cellular immunodeficiency caused by hiv-aggressive chemotherapy for cancer, and organ transplants may be associated with severe and sometimes fatal complications. however, based on what we said earlier, hiv-infected people, such as gay men, are more at risk of mpx infection. however, some vaccines are also being investigated to determine their effectiveness and efficiency in these people. however, dryvax as an existing approved vaccine can cause problems in immunocompromised people. despite the stated risks of the dryvax vaccine for immunocompromised individuals, this vaccine has been shown to be protective against mpx disease and infection after an intravenous challenge. one of the obstacles facing the development of vaccines is the lack of animal models. this seems to have been less challenging with mpx. in a study, hooper et al tried to investigate the effectiveness of a smallpox dna vaccine against mpx. they have reported that infection with the mpox in a rhesus macaque model caused a disease similar to human pox, and this animal model can be well used in vaccine studies for the poxviruses. also, this animal model is a suitable model for studies in the field of vaccination and immune response to the vaccine because it has the ability to quantitatively measure mpox genomes in blood, tissues, and skin in artificial mpx infection. vaccines developed for protection against mpx are capable of providing lasting immunity with a single dose and are prescribed to high-risk individuals exposed to sources of contamination. this seems to indicate the greater importance of humoral immunity in vaccinated individuals. however, to defend against natural infections with viruses, cellular immunity plays a prominent role. also, monocytes from mpox-infected individuals have been shown to have a higher ability to stimulate t cells to present mpox antigens than from vaccinated individuals. decreased immunity is known as one of the reasons for the emergence and increase of viral infections. nowadays, researchers consider one of the important factors in the emergence of mpx to be the reduction of the immunity of society, especially in young people. despite the effects of smallpox vaccination on immunization against mpx, previous outbreaks of mpx in the usa found that smallpox vaccination did not provide complete immunity against mpx. it is said that one out of five confirmed patients has already received this vaccine. modified vaccinia ankara is an attenuated strain of vaccinia that does not undergo a complete replication cycle in mammalian cells. however, after intramuscular injection in two doses, it has been observed that mva is immunogenic and protects nonhuman primates against this virus. it is also reported that the immunity created against mva lasts for more than .years. some viruses become weakened strains for vaccination by exposure to certain chemicals or physical methods. these vaccines lose part of their virion structure or functional enzymes; hence, they appear weakened compared to the wild strain. there is another vaccine called lc16m8 which is not able to express the functional b5r gene. this product of this gene is related to actin mediators and plays a role in cell-to-cell virus transmission. lc16m8 strain from nonhuman primates has been observed to perform well against reducing the clinical manifestations of mpx. as we mentioned earlier, the use of live vaccines is associated with challenges such as not using these vaccines in immunocompromised people. another challenge for live vaccines such as mva and lc16m8, which are both components of live vaccines, is their preparation and storage conditions. to solve this problem, lc16m8 is prepared and distributed as freeze-dried, and unlike mva, it does not need cold storage. the need for a cold transfer chain for mva, especially in african countries, is one of the challenges of this vaccine. today, next-generation vaccines based on dna or purified immunogenic proteins can help to overcome the need for the cold chain of vaccines. some studies to obtain vaccines with subunits of outer membrane proteins of vaccinia are in preliminary investigations. these vaccines have sometimes been proposed in combination with dna-based vaccines to prevent fatal mpx infection in nonhuman primates. by inferring the mentioned materials, it is easy to understand the immunity created against other genera of orthopoxviruses by the vaccine made for another genus. for example, it has been reported that in the few years after the end of routine vaccination for smallpox, it prevented up to % of severe diseases among family members exposed to mpx. perhaps due to this close relationship and immunity created for different viruses in the same genus, it is possible to use other viruses of this genus in the line of research related to dangerous and deadly viruses of this family, such as smallpox. although smallpox is an exclusively human disease and mpx is a shared disease between humans and animals, studies have shown that the use of different harvests in the treatment of smallpox can be beneficial for the treatment of mpx. today, at least until the availability of a vaccine and a specific drug for mpx, the treatments and vaccines used for smallpox are suggested to prevent or treat mpx. the importance of neutralizing antibodies has been confirmed in many studies. however, the immune system uses both humoral and cellular immunity to fight viruses. according to the report of previous studies, antibody responses decrease after a few years, so it is necessary to carry out studies on the effectiveness and stimulation of cellular immunity and the creation of memory cells through the vaccine. some animal studies have shown that dna-based vaccines can induce cellular immune responses to some extent. some studies favor an antibody response and antibody-mediated protection over class i or class ii histocompatibility-limited immune responses and have reported that cd4+ and cd8+ t cells are not as essential as antibodies to protect against disease. the development of a suitable dna vaccine for mpx, like other vaccine development platforms, has its hurdles. however, in some past studies in nonhuman primates, it has been reported that the dna-based vaccine had less humoral immunity compared to the live virus. one of the challenges facing dna vaccines is the delivery of antigens. in the study of hirao et al., the delivery of viral antigens through the intradermal route, which induces cell responses mainly of the th2 type, has been compared with the traditional im route. they have reported that injection and delivery of antigen from the id pathway confer protection against lethal mpv challenges in nonhuman primates. in this study, they reported that the response to ifn-γ and cd4 + t cells was greater in im injection than in id injection. nonetheless, they did not report a difference in cd8+ responses between id- and im-vaccinated groups. due to differences in vaccine administration, these responses cannot be related, as other studies have reported that injection of id-designed dna vaccine induced a quadrivalent hiv response. furthermore, studies have shown that the use of antigens in combination with adjuvants gives better results in achieving strong antibody responses. also, new technologies to obtain new vaccines can be very helpful in this matter. in shinoda et al.’s study, it has been reported that a slight modification in the structure of the l1 antigen in the dna vaccine used against smallpox can achieve a stronger neutralizing antibody response. among the viruses of the smallpox virus family, several immunogens have been identified. the smallpox virus l1 protein is one of the best-known smallpox immunogens, which has been the subject of numerous studies. this protein is encoded by l1r. to date, several dna vaccines for the l1 immunogen have been designed and tested in mice and nonhuman primates. these vaccines have been able to produce neutralizing antibodies in animal models and play a role in protecting them against fatal diseases. in order to achieve an effective vaccine against mpox, many studies need to be done to develop new vaccines and different methods of antigen delivery. in order to be successful in creating long-term immunity, it is necessary to strengthen the memory stimulation responses caused by the vaccine. this phenomenon was identified and confirmed in the study of several people who were exposed to the mpox but did not get sick. in addition to the mentioned cases, another challenge facing vaccine preparation is the strategies of escaping the immune system by viruses. orthopoxiruses use several different methods to hide from the immune system’s detection structures or inhibit the functional structures of the immune system. it has been shown that in lymphocytes infected with orthopoxiruses, some viral proteins suppress apoptosis in these cells by targeting innate immunity. it has also been reported in some studies that orthopoxiruses inhibit type interferon, some pathways of the complement system, and the production of host chemokines through changes in nuclear factor-kappa b. discussion more than years ago, edward jenner observed the protection of some milkmaids against smallpox, after being infected with cowpox, and the first concepts for immunization against smallpox using cowpox were created. since the eradication of smallpox, there have been concerns about the re-emergence of this devastating disease, which has increased after september . although mpx is a milder disease than smallpox and has a low mortality rate, it should be considered a health threat. in the past, mpx was common in endemic countries for many years, with few outbreaks reported in non-endemic countries each year. in mpx has spread rapidly in many countries. actions such as awareness of care, treatment, diagnosis, and vaccination for mpox are needed to overcome the further spread of mpox worldwide. laboratory diagnosis methods such as elisa and real-time pcr are used to speed up the diagnosis of patients to prevent the spread of mpox. using laboratory techniques to differentiate mpx from other patients such as chickenpox helps specialists. in the past, drugs such as tecovirimat, cidofovir, and brincidofovir have been used to treat smallpox, which can also be effective in the treatment of mpx. after identifying and during the treatment of patients with mpx, it is necessary to take care to prevent others from getting infected. finally, vaccination against mpx, like other viral infections, is the best option to prevent the spread of infection in large communities. various vaccines to prevent mpx such as imvamune, jynneos, and movihvax are being investigated. however, mpox is circulating rapidly in different countries and needs more attention and more studies to understand the characteristics of the disease in order to control the disease.
recent developments in mpox prevention and treatment options abstract human mpox is an emerging epidemic in the world. the monkey pox virus belongs to the same family of zoonotic orthopoxviridae as that of the smallpox virus and exhibits similar clinical symptomology. information regarding its diagnostics, disease epidemiology, surveillance, preventive methods, and treatment strategies are being collated with time. the purpose of this review is to trace the recent events in the scientific platform that have defined new preventive and treatment strategies against mpox. a methodological approach has been used to gather data from the latest literature to comprehensively overview the emerging treatment options. the results portion will cover details regarding the prevention of mpox. it will also shed light on a brief description of contemporary vaccines and antiviral agents that have been evaluated for their treatment potential since the emergence of the mpox threat. these treatment options are setting the pace for controlling the widespread monkeypox infection. however, the limitations attached to these treatment strategies need to be tackled quickly to increase their efficacy so that they can be deployed on a large scale for the prevention of this epidemic becoming another pandemic in this decade. . introduction despite so many advancements in the field of biotechnology, the world still has to face the burden of epidemics that slowly become pandemics. the world has yet not overcome the covid-pandemic, and other viral epidemics are already here, such as mpox, dengue, and ebola among others. the mpox virus is a zoonotic double-stranded dna virus belonging to the family of orthopoxviridae. some other infectious viruses of the past such as poxvirus, variola, cowpox, and vaccinia virus also belong to the same family. most of these other viruses of this family have caused havoc in past decades due to their link with large-scale pandemics. therefore, scientists are worried about the evolution of an mpox endemic to the world. so far, these are limited to african countries; however, some recent outbreaks have been reported in other continents as far as america, asia, and europe. the situation is thus alarming for scientific and healthcare networks around the world. the main route of viral spread is through contact with infectious sores and scabs, sharing clothes and bedding, or through the bodily transfer of fluids. the symptomology of mpox infection is similar to smallpox infection with a characteristic rash, fever, and flu-like symptoms. according to who reports, approximately disease incidences of mpox infection have been reported in endemic and outbreak regions. moreover, deaths have been recorded since the reporting of the first case of monkeypox infection. at the time of writing this review, mpox has spread to different countries of european, asian, american, middle eastern, australian, and south asian origin. the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment options for mpox are being developed from previous orthopox infection management. as it has a similar nature to smallpox and variola, the potential threat of the pandemic is the prime concern of the scientific community, and therefore vigorous effort is being made to deduce the effective therapeutic options and vaccination drives against monkeypox infection to avoid another biowarfare between humans and virus in the present decade. at present, the mpox is still in limited endemic form with mild and self-limiting disease symptoms. therefore, in most places, supportive care is being provided to patients, and preventive techniques are being promoted to avoid further virus spread in communities. however, the scientific community is still working continuously to compose antiviral therapies and useful vaccines ahead of time to tackle any future threats possibly arising from mpox. as of now, two vaccines have gained fda approval, namely jynneostm and acam200®, which belong to live replication-incompetent and replication-competent vaccinia viruses, respectively. moreover, some antiviral agents such as tecovirimat, brincidofovir, and cidofovir are also being suggested for tackling mpox in severe diseased cases and immunocompromised patients. the purpose of this article is to briefly evaluate the work carried out in the direction of prevention, treatment, and therapeutic compliance with mpox outbreaks and to discuss some of the latest technologies that are being given due consideration for future research orientation in the field of vaccinology and pharmaceuticals. moreover, light will also be shed upon the need to carry out more research and collaborative work for preventing mpox outbreaks in non-endemic countries. . methodology a methodological approach has been used to gather the latest data regarding the different dimensions of mpox prevention and treatment strategies, which allowed the inclusion of data from diverse, recent, and the most-cited sources of research studies. .. data extraction and search strategy we researched electronic sources such as google scholar, pub med, nih, scopus, and web of science. moreover, the official websites of the who, cdc, unaid, and fda were also used to obtain the statistical results and latest updates regarding mpox treatment efforts. as the study mainly incorporates the data regarding therapeutics and vaccines against mpxv, the major research terms were “monkeypox virus”, “mpox”, “mpox epidemic”, “therapeutics against mpox”, “antiviral agents”, “vaccines against mpox”, “vaccination strategies”, “therapies against mpox”, “novel therapeutic approaches”, and some other linked search terms. .. inclusion and exclusion criteria after a thorough analysis of the dates, abstracts, titles, and journals of research publications, they were made part of this review. the process of information gathering was not limited to a few studies but rather collected from research compilations in the form of original research articles, reviews, short commentaries, case reports, and letters to the editors. finally, the search strategy was limited to incorporating data from to to add only the most recent advances related to mpox management, especially during the latest endemic updates of . . results extensive data are already present regarding mpox etiology, epidemiology, latest updates on its outbreaks, infection cycle, host viral interaction, and possible viral targets for treatment purposes in recent publications. therefore, in this section we will only discuss the prevention strategies and treatment options, including vaccination and antiviral agents, that have come forward during outbreak months. the focus of the article remains, and readers obtain maximum information to understand therapeutic interventions against monkeypox infection. .. monkeypox: course of the epidemic and possible reasons for recent decline in cases mpxvwas first reported as an infection of zoonotic origin in the drc back in . it mostly remains endemic to african countries, mainly the drc, for these past years. vulnerable cases, including children, pregnant women, and the elderly with a suppressed immune system, are more prone to develop severe conditions. owing to its likely similarity with smallpox infection, the smallpox vaccine can be utilized against monkeypox as directed by the who. a few vaccine candidates, including the smallpox vaccine, vaccine candidates, and antiviral agents reported in; tabular format in this study, are currently being employed and tested for the treatment of mpox in endemic regions. the endemic nature of mpox has slowly taken the form of an epidemic due to reported cases in different far-off countries, such as the reported outbreaks in nigeria in . similarly, some cases have been reported in the uk, back in april . according to the who, approximately countries have already reported confirmed cases of mpox; these may include the uk, spain, portugal, canada, germany, belgium, italy, france, the netherlands, sweden, the uae, the czech republic, brazil, america, and most reported in the drc. however, it should be noted that the cases are pertinent to change on an everyday basis, and cases may be differently reported by the who and cdc by the time of this publication. until the date, january ~ confirmed cases of mpox have been reported from eu/eea countries. in the latest reports presented by the who, the regions of america and of africa have reported the highest number of mpox cases. however, there is also an observed decrease in overall mpox cases, by approximately .%, compared to previous months. the possible reason for the declining number of cases might be that the high-risk core groups of individuals have been undergoing vaccination. this scenario has generated a vaccination-elicited immunity in high-risk core groups. mpox cases are thus declining naturally. moreover, the effective public health measure adoption in these endemic regions has also limited the spread of mpox infections. an additional factor that should be noted is that mpox has neither a lifelong survival nature nor has purely the characteristic nature of sexually transmitted diseases such as hiv. the disease mostly remains self-limiting and resolves within –weeks of symptoms, as the host slowly develops immunity against it. thus, it is taken as an acute infection. however, it remains still unknown whether the first time mpox elicits durable and protective immunity to protect the host from re-infection or else they required proper medication and vaccination to prevent future infections. moreover, the nature of sexual transmission is still needed to be confirmed, since the high-risk group seems to have adopted some behavioral modifications such as limiting sexual encounters, which is suggested as the major reason behind the reduced spread of mpox. owing to these factors, there has been a natural decrease in mpox cases worldwide, though the situation keeps on changing every day. .. preventive measures against monkeypox whenever an infectious outbreak hits the world, the first step is to determine a prevention protocol against it. such is the case for the mpox resurging outbreak. for now, the approved vaccine is a smallpox vaccine that has been checked against mpox and has fda approval status against smallpox but is still limited to a specific group of personnel. thus, further clinical trials are needed for confirmed approval against mpox. other preventive measures proposed by healthcare authorities such as the who and cdc are outlined in the following section. • avoidance of direct zoonotic contact with animals that may carry mpox, such as monkeys and squirrels, etc. • avoid contact with objects that may be in touch with the infected animals outside of the infected places. • avoid contact with sick individuals with suspected and confirmed mpox since the infection easily spreads through body lesions. • proper sanitization and hand washing after contact with infected objects, places, and animals and use of personal protective equipment when encountering infected individuals. • thorough washing and proper cooking of animal meat products. • adopting careful measures during physical interaction. • isolation of infected individuals to avoid infection spreading to other persons. • wearing medical masks and gloves in cases of confirmed mpox. • proper disinfection and cleaning of infected places and hospital floors. • increase public awareness regarding risks of infection, preventive measures, and possible treatment options. • people with an increased risk of developing infection such as medical staff, laboratory workers, scientists, response teams, healthcare workers, and captive animals must be subjected to pre-exposure vaccination to avoid infection spread. • captive animals with the infection must be separated from other animals with proper quarantine care. .. pre-exposure prophylaxis in addition to the above-mentioned points, healthcare authorities including the advisory committee and immunization practices have recommended the pre- and post-prophylaxis vaccination for a specific group of people. for pre-exposure prophylaxis, vaccination with the fda-approved vaccines is recommended for people working for healthcare authorities with occupations where direct exposure to orthopoxviruses is predicted. these may include laboratory technicians and workers, clinical personnel involved in viral disease management, response teams against outbreaks, and vaccination and diagnostic teams, as well as scientists researching on clinical samples of mpox. thus, proper vaccination protocols should be proposed for ensuring the safety for these personnel. .. post-exposure prophylaxis pep is recommended upon unprotected contact with the skin mucous membrane of an infected person or with their bodily fluids, saliva, lesions, oral cavity, clothing, bedding, etc.. it may also be needed for people undergoing close space-sharing for long lengths with the infected person, which may expose them to viruses through aerosol secretions and viral presence in air particles. additionally, post-exposure vaccination is only recommended by the fda and cdc for high-degree exposures where there is a possible risk of contracting the virus but not a predictive confirmation as in the case of directly exposed persons. additionally, the lack of protective gloves and medical masks or contact-used material without pre- and post-exposure sanitization is a condition that sensitizes and necessitates vaccination. in cases of uncertain exposure or lower exposure rates, the recommended measures are to undergo diagnosis or monitoring before pep. transmission takes place with prolonged interaction with an infected animal or symptomatic individuals. thus, with informed guidance from the cdc, post-exposure vaccination should be conducted after approximately days and within a period of –days to avert disease development. if conducted later than the two week period, the disease onset cannot be prevented; however, the disease can only be reduced. .. therapeutics and vaccines enormous therapeutics have been proposed, with some having promising results against orthopoxvirus family members. these compounds have proven antiviral effects on smallpox treatment, but there are no confirmed results for mpox in human beings. however, as the first line of treatment, these antiviral agents, vaccines, and drugs are being utilized to avert the spread of mpox until a properly approved vaccine arrives in the healthcare market. .. vaccination efforts against mpox as described earlier, it is too soon to expect a vaccine against mpox since the outbreaks have been quite recently reported in different countries; before the current outbreak, the mpox was limited to only a few endemic regions of africa. however, now that the virus is surging in different countries, scientists have increased the pace of research to deliver an effective vaccine specific against mpox along with efficacious antiviral drugs. at present, smallpox vaccines which exhibit up to % protection are being used for mpox, which is a good line to start. the epidemiological data indicate that most of the mpox-infected cases were those who did not receive smallpox vaccination in childhood or had never been infected with poxviruses or those who were born after the smallpox pandemic and eradication period. currently, only two smallpox vaccines have been approved for mpox: a brief report of both vaccines is discussed ahead. upon cdc recommendation, these approved vaccines are used in the form of pre-exposure and post-exposure prophylaxis for some specific groups of people as discussed before. apart from the approved vaccines, some other vaccination trials are also going on. one such experiment was on the dryvax vaccine and the vaccinia virus vaccine, which were checked individually and in combination to determine the immune system response. the response came in terms of the initiation of cellular and humoral immune responses. moreover, some experiments on animal models compared the effect of vaccination on disease symptomology. vaccinated animals were healthier and exhibited fewer or no symptoms while the non-vaccinated animals exhibited various illness symptoms associated with mpxv infection. similarly, some animal models were checked for protein-based vaccination, and they experienced mild to severe symptoms of disease yet still survived, unlike those animals that received dna fragments and could survive. similarly, some studies concomitantly used both dna and protein-based vaccines and received good results in the form of lower symptom rates and disease resolution within a few days. immune system incitation in the form of antibody production against b-cell-conserved epitopes of mpox was also observed in these animals. moreover, experiments have also been conducted to check the impact of passive immunization by the transfer of vaccinia-neutralizing antibodies which demonstrated effective immune system responses in receiving animals. all these studies need to be further checked, and confirmation on human models is the next step to officially obtain a licensed vaccine against mpox. at present, only the approved vaccination is being used for pre- and post-exposure prophylaxis in high-risk individuals. the risk attached to the immune escape, viral mutation, and other strains of orthopox viruses make it imperative to work continuously on alternative vaccines specified against mpox. .. a brief account of approved vaccines two approved vaccines, jynneostm and acam2000®, are currently being utilized for pre- and post-prophylaxis in specific patients. these vaccines are not readily available and are limited to some endemic regions and most developed countries for precautionary use against mpox-reported cases. apart from these two vaccines, another vaccine, aventis pasteur smallpox vaccine, is authorized for emergency purposes in case the other two vaccines are not available or contradicted for application. some characteristic features of both approved vaccines are shown in table and a brief account of other vaccine trials is summarized in table below. .. antiviral therapeutics against mpox the smallpox viruses caused havoc back in its pandemic times and is still considered a bioweapon for its associated lethality and infectivity. owing to the similar nature of monkeypox viruses, scientists are putting a lot of effort to propose rigorous drugs against mpox. the suggested drugs are undergoing approval stages, and some are being used for the supportive care of patients. problems associated with vaccination restriction compel the healthcare authorities to heavily rely on these supportive drugs and antiviral agents in case of treatment urgency. moreover, the disease cases which already developed symptomology of mpox vaccine remain ineffective for reducing the symptoms, and thus drugs come into play. the three most common drugs that are being utilized against mpox are named cidofovir, brincidofovir, and tecovirimat. a brief account of these drugs is discussed below. .. cidofovir against mpox this is a broad-spectrum antiviral agent which acts to terminate dna polymerase-based replication in the form of ′-diphosphorylated metabolite and thus is effective against a wide range of dna viruses. it has proven to be efficacious against viral infections such as hiv, vaccinia, mpox, smallpox, etc.. the main routes of administration include topical and intravenous administration. the best feature of this antiviral agent is that it decreases the symptomology to avert lesions formation and reduces mortality rates. it is used as a second-line therapy for severe vaccinia. specifically, in the case of mpox, the trials have demonstrated reversed mpox by inhibiting mpox replication. however, it has been reported to cause nephrotoxicity during intravenous administration and thus requires probenecid and hydration and proper dose adjustment with renal functional considerations to deal with nephrotoxicity. moreover, more clinical experimentation is required on mpox cases in humans. .. brincidofovir against mpox brincidofovir functions by phosphorylation to its active metabolic form “cidofovir diphosphate”. it selectively inhibits activity against orthopox dna polymerase and thus has proven effective against dna viruses. it is also known as a lipid conjugate of cidofovir and is considered to be a cidofovir diphosphate prodrug. lipid acylic nucleoside phosphonate works as a phospholipid in the body and lessens lesion formation with no proven impact with coupled vaccination. in some cases, reports demonstrated complete recovery of patients with minimal side effects. thus, it received approval against cytomegalovirus retinitis in hiv patients and received approval for smallpox and related infections in . it is preferred for rapid and widespread administration in cases of emergency outbreaks. unlike cidofovir, it has good oral bioavailability and no reported nephrotoxicity; therefore, it is approved for oral administration. however, the liver enzymatic profile must be carefully regulated, and functional tests must be conducted for the application. additionally, due to hyperactive drug accumulation, it not recommended for immunocompromised patients, pregnant women, and newborns. recently animal experimentation against mpox reported effective treatment, but it requires more clinical experiments for proper approval and licensure. .. tecovirimat - against mpox this was licensed in for smallpox and in for mpox. it functions to inhibit viral egress by targeting a unique gene that produces the m37 envelope protein required for viral maturation and release. it has reported high efficacy against orthopoxvirsues by reducing viral replication pace and viral load. moreover, it causes delayed viral infection onset and decreases lesion formation and thus causes reduced infection symptomology and mortality rates. repeated experiments have well established its safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetic profiles. it showed concomitant immunological effects in coupled vaccination experiments. however, the issue of drug resistance development is there, and no teratogenicity has been predicted in pregnant women. specifically for mpox, it has been checked in humans but lacks randomized phase trials and thus needs further experimentation. .. vaccinia immune globulin against mpox this was licensed in against vaccinia virus infections. it acts as an alternative to antiviral agents. its derivatives, recombinant immunoglobulins, are under investigation. rvigs work on a strategic passive immunotherapy approach. the candidate’s plasma-derived vaccinia immunoglobulins, vigiv cangene and vigiv dynport, are under investigation and are not licensed yet. it has been used successfully in refractive cases. as a hyperimmune globulin, it functions to neutralize virus particles and reduces viremia and mortality rates by up to –%. antibodies are collected from the plasma of smallpox-immune individuals to create passive immunity. it has been redistricted for application in immunodeficient individuals as it contains amounts of maltose that possibly affect glycemic conditions and insulin levels, may interfere with serological testing, needs caution for renal insufficient profiles, and increases revaccination needs. there are a lack of human testing data against mpox and thus needs further investigation. apart from these three antiviral agents, some other important drug candidates under trial against mpox are summarized in table . note that a detailed explanation of these trials can be traced in the referenced publications since a detailed analysis of these studies is beyond scope of this review article. .. future directions for antiviral therapies against mpox as progress in the field of biotechnology increases, more effort is being put forward to propose novel therapeutic approaches against emerging infectious diseases. knowing the scope of current targeted therapy approaches such as those based on micrornas and silencing rnas, there is work happening to find accurate targeted molecules against mpox. similarly, biomarker-based therapies are also in research annals as biomarkers offer an effective targeting and flexible drug design approach against different kind of diseases. for viral diseases, the biobased approaches allow effective screening, diagnosis, prognosis, and mitigative vaccination and adaptive treatment measures. moreover, by integrating the in silico and bioinformatic statistical and molecular models with biomarker-based theory, more sophisticated therapies could be formulated with fewer side effects, better delivery, reduced resistance potential, and improved pharmacokinetic properties. the next step in the development of better antivirals against infectious diseases such as mpox includes the discovery of better cellular targets, innovative drug-targeting strategies, and improved drug delivery mechanisms. important drug targets and biobased markers tested in different studies are part of table . most of these biomarkers have been proposed while keeping in consideration the genomic similarities between smallpox and mpox, which sets a trace route for future therapies. another important development that is predictive to develop better treatment options for mpox in the future includes nanotechnology-based therapies. specifically, silver nanoparticles have been investigated for their proven antimicrobial properties. agnps are being utilized to decrease the infectivity of mpox in different studies. nanotechnology-based therapies offer novel, inexpensive, and broad-spectrum treatment options against different diseases. the basic principle is to alter the properties of present and newer antivirals at the nanoscale to improve their physiochemical features and linked pharmaceutical properties. another approach is the conjugation of nanoparticles with the approved drugs to improve the effectiveness, targeted delivery, and improved drug delivery to the body. specific studies of agnps against mpox have exhibited their dose-dependent inhibitory effect. however, more studies are needed to prove the research implication in clinical models. . conclusions complex and exaggerating burdens have been imposed on the healthcare system owing to the covid-pandemic and converging outbreaks of various other viral infections at the same time including ebola, dengue, and mpox. under these pressurized conditions, the scientific community is rigorously working to produce an effective therapy against mpox and other infectious diseases. though there is effective work being conducted in the field of vaccination and drug design, the current developments are still considered theoretical because most of the drugs are for diseases of smallpox origin. therefore, more effort should be kept on modern therapeutic options to specify them against mpox. there is a need to coordinate their efforts with an integrated approach with the medical industry for clinical experimentation. the recommendations from healthcare authorities have been properly outlined, and treatment recommendations and vaccination protocols have also been formulated against specific groups of the workforce and susceptible persons. thus, a coordinated and participatory approach will be needed to educate the community and general public in awareness programs regarding mitigation, adaptation, and disease management before the epidemic of mpox becomes another pandemic of the century.
prior viral infection determines the mode and severity of monkeypox virus abstract objectives monkeypox is a zoonotic virus in the genus orthopoxvirus. it is transmitted from animal to human, and between humans. the clinical presentations vary, starting with a prodrome phase to different skin findings and systemic complications. methods we present two distinctive cases of mpox co-infected with other viruses by clinical and histopathological analysis. results surprisingly, the mpox patient with a history of hcv developed different skin pathological characteristics. in contrast, patients living with hiv presenting with mpox had severe inflammatory cutaneous changes and distortion of the skin architecture. conclusion our findings strongly suggest that mpox infections likely occur in the presence of one or more previous other viral infections, and the prior infection with specific microbes determines the severity of mpox infection. introduction monkeypox is a zoonotic disease that was initially isolated in a laboratory in denmark from monkeys,,. the first human case of mpox was diagnosed in the democratic republic of congo in . various mpox outbreaks occurred since worldwide, with scattered cases of mpox in central and west africa diagnosed between -. the most recent outbreak began in december and continuously spread in western countries, it is considered the largest one,,. further, this outbreak is commonly observed in men having sex with men, and it is a sexually related ailment. case presentation case a -year-old homeless male with chronic hepatitis c presented to the hospital with a distinct rash on his left upper extremity that started a few days before. the patient states the rash was painful and mildly itchy and spread to his upper arm and back. the rash was preceded by days of fever, fatigue, and myalgia. the patient had sexual intercourse with a new male partner.figure 1a patient with hepatitis c virus co-infected with monkeypox and a patient with hiv co-infected with monkeypox and histological analysis. figure showed raised vesiculopapular rash on the left upper extremity and back of the hand. figure showed pathological changes in the entire tissue sections with different levels of inflammation along with fibrotic changes. figure showed a cluster of neutrophils in the stratum corneum of the patient, a noticeable viral cytopathic consequence that affects the keratinocytes, including vacuolization, enlargement, and nuclear basophilia with a prominent granular layer and a pronounced basket-weave appearance of the horny layer. the leukocytic interface is rich in inflammatory cells and predominately with deep epidermal apoptosis. the subepidermal bulla was festooned by the epidermal papilla. epidermal pallor in the stratum corneum showed hyperkeratosis, and dyskeratotic keratinocytes. figure showed pathological cellular changes in the skin at 40x magnification. the cells are characterized by round nuclei, surrounded by intracytoplasmic edema. figure showed different stages of diffused skin rash and most of the rash was characterized by a vesiculopapular pattern. figure was the cross-section of the skin with severe inflammatory changes and thinning of the epidermal layer. figure showed novel cells, characterized by duplicated kissing nuclei and the bullae filled with severe inflammatory cells and eosinophilic inclusion body. figure showed severe hemorrhage in the dermis and hypodermis. also, severe apoptosis was noticed. figure showed various changes in the skin at 40x magnification, the inset shows few viable keratinocytes; hydropic degeneration; severe dermal congestion; and epidermal vacuolar degeneration.figure physical examination showed raised vesiculopapular rash on his left upper extremity and back, associated with lymphadenopathy in the axilla and supraclavicular areas. no organomegaly or neurological deficits. vital signs are within normal consideration. laboratory results showed mild leukocytosis with predominant lymphocytes. the laboratory investigation including a comprehensive metabolic panel, renal function test, urinalysis, and liver function test is within normal range besides the elevation of alanine aminotransferase, and aspartate transaminase. the liver ultrasound was normal. tests for chlamydia/gonorrhea, hiv, herpes simplex, and syphilis are negative. the patient was diagnosed with mpox via polymerase chain reaction, and the biopsy showed various histopathological changes. further, laboratory diagnosis showed hepatitis c antibody, and detectable viral load. case a -year-old homosexual male with a past medical history of hiv presented to our clinic with a rash on his face, genitalia, and bilateral upper extremity. the patient admitted fever, fatigue, and sweats days before the onset of the rash. the rash was severely diffused, mildly painful, and itchy. as per the patient, he is taking biktarvy for his hiv, his last checkup months ago showed an undetectable viral load and cluster of differentiation was within the normal range. physical examination showed diffused vesiculopapular rash accompanied by bilateral axillary and anterior cervical lymphadenopathy. the patient was diagnosed with mpox via pcr. the rest of his laboratory results for sexually transmitted diseases, urinalysis, comprehensive metabolic panel, and complete blood count are within normal consideration. further, the cbc showed slight leukocytosis with predominant lymphocytes. histopathology case we found significant differences in the skin pathology in patients infected with the hepatitis c virus who developed acute mpox infection. the skin pathology showed a cluster of neutrophils in the stratum corneum. additionally, a prominent viral cytopathic effect in keratinocytes, vacuolization, enlargement, and nuclear basophilia with a prominent granular layer and a pronounced basket-weave appearance of the horny layer were detected. there is leukocytic interface dermatitis, which is rich in inflammatory cells, and upper layers of epidermal apoptosis. the subepidermal bulla was also identified with the festooning of the epidermal papilla. epidermal pallor in the stratum corneum, hyperkeratosis, dyskeratotic keratinocytes, and a superficial perivascular mixed inflammatory infiltrate in the dermis are also seen in this case. this patient has a mild inflammatory response mentioned previously. also, the red and black arrows point to distinct cellular changes that are normally not present in the upper epidermal layer. those cells are characterized by round nuclei, surrounded by intracytoplasmic edema. thus, the differential cells could be melanocytes, merkel's cells, versus others. also, the keratinocytes have different characteristics including degenerative changes and a few multinucleated keratinocytes. case we observed differences in the skin pathology of patients infected with the mpox virus who had an earlier history of hiv infection. in this case, the histopathologic examination shows an epidermis with sheets of necrotic keratinocytes with adjacent neutrophil crust. hydropic degeneration, severe dermal congestion, and epidermal vacuolar degeneration were identified all over the skin. severe inflammation was noticed along with fibrosis and apoptotic cells. surprisingly, some odd cell types were observed in this case, and these cells are characterized by duplicated kissing nuclei. the classic picture of mpox does not have such cells, also we have not noted such cellular changes in prior cutaneous viral infections. further, bullae filled with severe inflammatory cells and eosinophilic inclusion bodies were also noticed. moreover, we found an accumulation of red blood cells, which indicates severe vasodilation and bleeding in that area. this may be related to inflammatory cytokines, endothelial nitrite, and other vasodilators. furthermore, spongiosis, the presence of multiple bullae in the epidermis and dermis, and the presence of an eosinophilic body were detected, and notably, the stratum corneum was very thin in this patient. discussion histopathology of skin from these two cases shares few similarities with the classical histopathological changes during acute infection with mpox, but there is a cellular defect noticed among both patients that were not observed in the classical version of histopathological alterations in any of these viruses,,,,. we found significant differences in the skin histopathology of patients infected with hcv who developed acute mpox infection. those differences are characterized by a cluster of neutrophils in the stratum corneum, viral cytopathic effect in keratinocytes, vacuolization, and so forth, as described previously in the histopathology section. however, the classical cutaneous changes in hcv infection alone showed accumulation of various inflammatory cells, but predominantly the lymphocytes, a few fibrinoid necroses of the dermal vessels, bullae, saw-tooth appearance of the epidermis, and epidermal pallor. further, hyperkeratosis, severe dyskeratotic keratinocytes, fibrotic changes, spongiosis, and architecture distortion were also observed in the patient infected with hcv alone. whereas the classical hiv skin findings consist of munro micro abscess, inflammatory cell accumulations, thin epidermis, parakeratosis, hyperkeratosis, mild spongiosis, bulla, and spindle cell proliferation. these are common cutaneous findings associated with various skin manifestations in patients living with hiv, which are distinctive from the findings associated with mpox infection alone. the classic skin findings of mpox during the acute infection showed bullae, spongiosis mild acanthosis with slight inflammatory cells within the epidermis. although, the junction of dermal-epidermal junction contains mixtures of inflammatory cells and some bullae. in the dermal layer, various mild to moderate inflammatory cells are seen in perieccrine and perivascular circulation. the involvement of eccrine was extended from acrosyringium, where few lymphocytes have shown exocytosis into the epithelium, to the eccrine coils. further, perivascular involvement is more around the superficial and deep layer of vascular supplies. moreover, edematous changes and degenerative ballooning of keratinocytes were also seen in the acute stage. rarely, few multinucleated keratinocytes subsisted, and guarnieri-type intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies are also observed. because we found these pathological changes less severe than that observed in patients who were infected with those viruses alone, further investigation is warranted with a large population. we observed significant differences in the skin pathology of patients infected with the mpox virus who had an earlier history of hiv infection or hcv infection. the histopathologic examination in our patient with hiv co-infected with mpox shows severe cellular and architectural changes that are distinct from the classical mpox, or hiv alone. however, the cutaneous manifestation of mpox co-infection with hcv displayed different pathological characteristics from the classical mpox or hcv, or hiv alone, and/or hiv co-infected with mpox. most importantly, the changes observed in mpox plus hcv are significantly less severe than those observed in these two conditions independently. however, the skin lesions are severe in the case of mpox with hiv co-infection, even when compared to their skin pathological changes independently. the pathophysiology of such changes in mpox co-infection with various viruses is unclear. gigante et al., found two different genomic families of mpox from nine distinctive patients in the united states of america in ; a cardinal variant named b.and an infrequent variant named a.. genetic analysis of those variants demonstrated predominant guanine-to-adenine alterations within themes identified by apolipoprotein b editing complex, cytosine deaminase, a host anti-viral defence protein, which catalyzes single base pair mutation. these findings suggest that mpox evolution may have been determined by apobec3 activity, and additional mutations may emerge or exist among different outbreak patients. co-infectivity is a broad and complex mechanism. it has been previously reported that the hepatitis e virus co-infects individuals with hepatitis b virus despite the distinct genetic phenotype. although this co-infectivity has been shown to advance hepatitis b chronicity leading to fulminant hepatitis, the authors noted that co-infectivity also resolves the conditions,,, this is also can happen when hbv patients co-infected by the hepatitis d virus, the latter leads to severe liver injury. this phenomenon was supported by kilonzo et al., who documented that the hev inhibits hbv dna replication. however, in the case of the mpox virus, potential co-infection was demonstrated which leads to a progression of infectivity. precisely, khallafallah and grose, described that human herpesvirus-is a risk factor for the acquisition of the mpox virus. further, the authors noted that human herpes-facilitates the penetration of mpox through the skin, and these viruses share some similarities in terms of viremia with a cellular stress response leading to high levels of interleukin-production which may contribute to the severity of the infection,,,. additionally, murid herpesvirus-was shown to protect against mouse pneumovirus through the il-mechanism. our findings in the current study corroborated well with this observation that the skin changes in patients infected with hiv who had mpox showed a worsening inflammatory response. in contrast, our study on hcv and mpox co-infection clearly demonstrates that the mpox infection was resolved in the presence of hcv co-infection. although the reason for such a phenomenon is unclear, abouelasrar et al., reported that hcv infection significantly contributes to the elevation of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin -il-and tumor necrosis factor-alpha. such an increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines in the acute phase of infection and inflammation post-hcv further stimulates acute phase protein serum amyloid a. noteworthy, a rise in the saa level has been considered as a potential anti-viral since the saa specifically interacts with viral particles. however, saa could divert infectivity when functioning like apolipoprotein. this pattern is frequently seen during various viral infections which include human herpes-measles, mumps, cytomegaly virus, and rubella,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,. thus, it is possible that these protective mechanisms may have occurred in the current study. these mechanistic aspects will be explored in future studies.table 1mpox virus co-infection with another microorganism.table 1authorscases and co-infectionfonti et al.acute severe arthritis in hiv plus mpoxde sousa et al.human mpox co-infection with acute hivbížová et al.co-infection of syphilis and mpox in hiv positiveogoina et al.a retrospective study of patients with mpox, the hiv individuals have more severe and prolonged illness as well as more secondary bacterial infection when compared with non-hiv individuals who had mpoxzambrano sánchez and moyanoa case of mpox co-infection with syphilis and hivnolasco et al.mpox co-infection with sars-cov-and hivzlámal et al.mpox co-infection with herpes simplex virus type and hivhoff et al.varicella co-infection in patients with active mpoxsilva et al.acute hiv and mpox co-infectionhughes et al.coinfections of mpox and varicella zoster virusel-qushayri et al.covid-and mpox co-infectionprabaker et al.herpes simplex virus type and mpox co-infectionmartins-filho et al.mpox and varicella zoster virus co-infectionramoni et al.syphilis and mpox co-infectionstephen et al.mpox and varicella zoster viruses co-infectionhoffmann et al.mpox virus infections among men with and without hivdesgranges et al.mpox virus co-infected with chlamydia trachomatis and neisseria gonorrheaeabdullgaffar and abdulrahmanmpox virus, herpes simplex virus, and cytomegalovirus skin coinfectionspaparizos et al.mpox virus plus secondary syphilis co-infection in an hiv-positive patientvidelefsky et al.herpes simplex virus type and mpox co-infectionbrazão et al.mpox virus infection in hiv--co-infected patients previously vaccinated against smallpoxrizzo et al.concomitant diagnosis of sexually transmitted infections and mpox in patients attending a sexual health clinicmpox, monkeypox conclusion our findings collectively suggest that mpox infections likely occur in the presence of other viral infections and that the prior infection with specific microbes determines the severity of mpox infection. notably, mpox infectivity may be severe in the presence of a specific virus. in contrast, the infectivity may resolve in the presence of another type of virus. because nothing is currently known about the potential mechanisms involved in such differential infectivity, further research is warranted to determine the exact nature of the co-infection. declaration of competing interest all authors have completed icmje uniform disclosure form. dr. paidas is part of bioincept llc with stock options. the other authors have no conflicts of interest or competing interests to declare. funding this study was supported by the university of miami miller school of medicine research fund, muriel, murray & robert smith foundation covid-research fund, and the university of miami miller school of medicine team science research fund. ethical approval the authors are accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. this research has received all the required approvals. the patient has provided written informed consent and had no objections or comments regarding the publication of this case report and its content. acknowledgment we thank dr. ali snan, md, internist, larkin community hospital, department of internal medicine and infectious disease, miami, fl, usa, for assistance with histopathology. authors contributions arj, hh, and mjp conceived the study, hh, af, lm, eg, and ec performed biopsies, arj, af, hh, mjp, eaw, rrc, rr, and zfs conducted the histopathology analyzed the images, and wrote the paper.
mpox neglect and the smallpox niche: a problem for africa, a problem for the world abstract mpox is a zoonotic viral disease endemic in parts of africa. in may, the world was alerted to circulation of monkeypox virus in many high-income countries outside of africa. continued spread resulted in a who declaration of a public health emergency of international concern. although there has been much attention on the global outbreak, most of the focus has been on high-income countries outside of africa, despite the fact that monkeypox virus has been causing disease in parts of africa for at least years. furthermore, the long-term consequences of this event, especially the risk that mpox fills the niche vacated through smallpox eradication, have not been sufficiently considered. the heart of the problem is the historical neglect of mpox in africa where the disease is endemic, and the actual and potential consequences if this neglect is left uncorrected. declaration of interests dgb is a member of and dlh is an adviser for the who mpox international health regulations emergency committee. ia and j-jm declare no competing interests.
progress and prospects on vaccine development against monkeypox infection abstract the monkeypox virus is an uncommon zoonotic illness brought on by an orthopoxvirus. mpox can occur with symptoms similar to smallpox. since april nations have reported confirmed cases and fatalities. moreover, the outspread prevalence of mpox in africa and a current outbreak of mpox in the u.s. have made it clear that naturally occurring zoonotic opxv infections remain a public health concern. existing vaccines, though they provide cross-protection to mpox, are not specific for the causative virus, and their effectiveness in the light of the current multi-country outbreak is still to be verified. furthermore, as a sequel of the eradication and cessation of smallpox vaccination for four decades, mpox found a possibility to re-emerge, but with distinct characteristics. the world health organization suggested that nations use affordable mpox vaccines within a framework of coordinated clinical effectiveness and safety evaluations. vaccines administered in the smallpox control program and conferred immunity against mpox. currently, vaccines approved by who for use against mpox are replicating, low replicating, and non-replicating. although vaccines are accessible, investigations have demonstrated that smallpox vaccination is approximately % efficient in inhibiting mpox. in addition, developing new vaccine methods against mpox can help prevent this infection. to recognize the most efficient vaccine, it is essential to assess effects, including reactogenicity, safety, cytotoxicity effect, and vaccine-associated side effects, especially for high-risk and vulnerable people. recently, several orthopoxvirus vaccines have been produced and are being evaluated. hence, this review aims to provide an overview of the efforts dedicated to several types of vaccine candidates with different strategies for mpox, including inactivated, live-attenuated, virus-like particles, recombinant protein, nucleic acid, and nanoparticle-based vaccines, which are being developed and launched. graphical abstract image introduction the orthopoxviruses are a genus of the poxviridae's chordopoxvirus subfamily, including members that cause sickness in humans and other animals. the most well-known member of this genus, variola virus, is a human-specific pathogen that caused smallpox, which was eliminated more than three decades ago after widespread immunization with the closely related vaccinia virus. the monkeypox virus is prevalent in several african nations. however, rodents are likely the primary reservoir, with monkeys and humans serving as accidental hosts. human-to-human transmission of mpox is expected to occur predominantly via close contact with symptomatic patients. it is assumed to occur through direct or indirect interaction with living or dead infected animals. phylogenetic analysis revealed that viral diversity is geographically structured into two major clades. these were named for the places where the virus is most prevalent: west africa and the congo basin. there have been five significant mpox outbreaks documented, occurring in –and ]. a multi-country epidemic that is continuing in with confirmed cases and fatalities recorded from countries. as of july the highest number of cases was in the countries of the u.s., gibraltar, portugal, the netherlands, and malta. the u.s. has the highest number of infected patients, with cases. however, the mpox generates relatively subtle symptoms in immunocompetent persons. if the virus spreads to those with weakened immune systems, children, the elderly, pregnant women, and people with co-morbidities like hiv/aids and diabetes, severe sickness or death may follow. the precise cause of mpox's reappearance has yet to be determined. however, one of the likely drivers of the mpox worldwide expansion might be the discontinuation of smallpox vaccination, which resulted in a lack of waning of people's immunity. mpox infection was characterized by a distinctive rash of several hundred simultaneous lesions on the face, arms, legs, and, less often, the palms, soles, or genitalia. prodromal signs such as fever, lymphadenopathy, and influenza-like symptoms usually preceded the rash. however, preliminary research on the virus suggests that cases in the current outbreak are atypical, with the rash appearing in more unusual areas of the body, particularly the genital and perianal areas, without spreading to other body regions and with a relative mildness or absence of prodromal symptoms. the patient experiences a rash on the face that extends to other body parts after the onset of a fever. the oropharynx is where lesions originate and progress throughout the body. after exposure, serum abs might be found around two weeks later. depending on the genetic makeup of the mpox strain causing the infection and the accessibility to contemporary treatment, the mortality rate ranges between and %. the severe skin problem raises worries about subsequent bacterial infections of the skin, which have been seen in % of unvaccinated mpox patients. as stated by the who, mpox is treated with supportive care. vaccines and remedial produced for smallpox and accepted in some countries can be utilized for mpox in some situations. mpox is recently being treated with medications formerly administered for smallpox or other infections arising from the orthopoxvirus, including tecovirimat, cidofovir, and brincidofovir. furthermore, vaccinia immune globulin, which is created from composed human plasma of individuals who have been administered the smallpox vaccination, is one of the treatments for mpox. international health administrators have proposed many methods to combat mpox transmission, including the introduction of vaccinations for those who have had close contact with mpox patients and for populations at risk of occupational exposure to mpox. close contact with lesions, bodily fluids, respiratory droplets, and fomite may transfer mpox from person to person. however, the current epidemiological environment raises questions regarding the viral transmission dynamics and epidemic scale. since the vaccine's intended effect is protection against mpox, it makes sense to create it directly from the virus. a pure, attenuated, or already dead virus is used in one of the more conventional methods. although the smallpox vaccine preserves immunity against mpox, it is doubtful to be of any use given the current incidence in the year . this is shown by the fact that smallpox vaccination programs were abandoned years ago and that there is now no vaccine available for nations with minimal resources. it is possible to use smallpox and mpox vaccinations as pre-exposure prophylaxis and post-exposure preventive measures. to protect contacts and vulnerable individuals at high risk, prep injection is best delivered in conjunction with second or third-generation vaccinations, such as acam2000, lc16m18, and jynneos vaccines. within –days of exposure, pep injections can be given to treat the condition and lessen the severity of the infection,, ]. acam2000 and jynneos are two u.s. food and drug administration-confirmed vaccines that can inhibit mpox infection. however, acam2000 may cause significant adverse events, such as coronary artery disease, whereas jynneos is related to fewer side effects. the current worldwide prevalence has once again focused on the requirement for continuous monitoring and the advance of new prevention and curative methods. in a new vaccine based on a modified attenuated vaccinia virus was allowed for mpox inhibition. while the acam2000 vaccine led to some adverse events in atopic dermatitis individuals and immunocompromised individuals, the modified vaccinia ankara vaccine is safe to utilize in those sick individuals. smallpox vaccine is believed to be cross-protective against mpox, with some information from minor investigations appraising preservation as high as %. based on existing data, there is still a need to progress an efficient and safe novel generation of vaccines particular for mpox that are developed into novel vaccine methods, such as virus-like particles, recombinant protein, nucleic acid, and nanoparticle-based vaccines, before mpox is declared a pandemic. to create better-defined vaccines, subunit vaccines targeting preservative antigens and delivered as purified protein or plasmid dna or virally vectored vaccines targeting one or both of the two immunologically distinct infected types of poxviruses, the mature virion and the enveloped virion, have been developed. nucleic acid vaccines are safe and successfully mimic the immunization of inactivated vaccines. furthermore, the industrial generation of such vaccines is affordable and straightforward. to recognize the most efficient vaccine, it is essential to assess effects, including reactogenicity, safety, cytotoxicity effect, and vaccine-associated side effects, especially for high-risk and vulnerable people. the extra-african mpox epidemic has highlighted the absence of vaccines with proven effects and low reactogenicity. it is considered that the utilization of this vaccine in the mpox outbreak may play a function in the inhibition or attenuation of the infection as prep is in close contact with approved cases. in this review, we will summarize the various characteristics of mpox, such as structure, genome, and pathogenesis. in addition, we present an up-to-date discussion of the current state of knowledge regarding the mpox virus, with a particular focus on innate and adaptive immune response and vaccination against the mpox. the advantages and disadvantages of all the traditionally used mpox vaccines, including lc16m8, acam2000, jynneos, and dryvax, were reviewed. additionally, this review aims to give a general overview of the work done to develop and assess various novel vaccine candidates for mpox, including inactivated vlps, recombinant protein, nucleic acid, and nanoparticle-based vaccines. this review article may aid in the creation of an innovative and valuable mpox preventive strategy. characteristics and structure of the monkeypox virus despite having a sizable linear double-stranded dna that contains all the enzymes required for replication and assembly, mpox translates their genetic material in the cytoplasm of infected cells using the ribosomes of their host cells. approximately by nm-sized lipoprotein outer membrane surrounds the ovoid or brick-shaped mpox. intracellular mature virions and extracellular enveloped virions are the two types of virions. evs have a separate envelope that mvs do not. a dumbbell-shaped nucleus and two lateral bodies are positioned between the concavities and the outer membrane within the viral particle. scientists recently developed confident assumptions regarding the structure of mpox variations' whole proteome, as well as the pockets that contain tiny molecules. mpox has immunological cross-reactivity with three additional opxvs that infect humans, soluble antigens, nucleoprotein antigens, and erythrocyte agglutinins. each mpox contains more than viral structural and membrane proteins, dna-dependent rna polymerase, and associated transcriptional enzymes. the viral core and lateral body, which include some proteins, were coated by a lipoprotein envelope on the surface of the mv. when a cell is destroyed, mv is released, and it is generally stable in the outside environment. it is used chiefly for transmission. a lipid membrane is wrapped around mvs to create ev, which is then released by exocytosis. it came from the movement of endosomes or the golgi apparatus.fig. 1the structural features of mpox and its structure of the extracellular enveloped and intracellular mature orthopox virion. mpox is an enveloped ds-dna virus that belongs to the genus opxvs in the family poxviridae.fig. monkeypox genome the inverted terminal repeats of the mpox are made up of hairpin loops, tandem repeats, and a few open reading frames, and the mpox is a kb linear ds-dna covalently joined at its ends by palindromic hairpins. variable ends with inverted terminal repeat protect the genomes favorably conserved central coding site. at least orfs are required for poxvirus replication and morphogenesis. many extra non-essential orfs contribute to variances in poxvirus host tropism, immunomodulation, and pathogenicity, with many orfs currently awaiting functional characterization. the outer membrane protects membrane junctions and the densely packed core, which contains enzymes, a ds-dna genome, and transcription factors. all proteins required for viral dna replication, transcription, virion assembly, and egress are encoded by the mpox genome. according to a comparison of the varv and mpox genomes, the core region of the mpox genome contains essential enzymes and structural proteins and is .% similar to that of the varv. however, the terminal portions of the mpox genome that encode virulence and host range factors vary dramatically. these areas of mpox and other opxvs contain multiple known host ranges and immunomodulatory genes. these genes have developed precisely to block many processes simultaneously, including pattern-recognition receptor signaling, apoptosis, chemokine and cytokine function, and lymphocyte and antibody activity. according to o'toole and rambaut, a cytidine deaminase termed apolipoprotein b editing complex may be driving the recent fast development of mpox. cytidine deaminases cause double-stranded breaks in dna at switch sites.fig. 2mpox genome structure. there are about kilobase pairs in the mpox genome, with the core genomic region totaling kbp. the coding area, nr1, and nr2 sections, and inverted terminal repeats totaling base pairs are present in both ends of the molecule.fig. monkeypox virus pathogenesis during viral entry, fusion, replication, and release, known as pathogenesis, mpox generates two infectious forms, evs and mvs. evs are mvs that have been changed to have three membranes, each of which is antigenically distinct, as opposed to mvs, which are restricted by a single membrane and are only released following host cell lysis. it has been shown that ev antigen-targeting vaccines and abs provide less protection than those that do. enveloped virions are those that leave the host cell, while cell-associated enveloped virions are those that remain on the cell surface. there are differences between cevs and evs, but because of their resemblance, we shall use the word ev to designate both cev and ev. previously, mpox was produced, collected from cell culture, sonicated, frozen, and thawed to release mv. so, the inoculum's evs lose their protective outer membrane and are replaced by mv. mpox may enter the body intradermally, via the nasopharynx, or through the oropharynx. before spreading to local lymph nodes, the virus multiplies at the injection site. once the virus has established itself in the bloodstream, it travels to other body parts. mpox has morphological similarities with other recognized opxvs. mpoxs have an exterior membrane composed of lipoproteins and can be either oval or brick-shaped. the expression of early genes is required for both the start of viral dna synthesis and the production of transcriptional regulatory factors for intermediate genes. the middle transcription factor family is a subset of late transcription factors. virions can be produced and assembled in the cytoplasm's electron-rich regions where mature protein molecules and enzymes are present. this is important for several reasons, including the attraction of early transcription factors intended to be packed into developing virions. in developing virions, emerging genomic dna is organized into genome units and crammed into enormous concatemeric precursors. some imvs undergo a subsequent envelope whereby they acquire even more glycoproteins; this is facilitated by proteolytic activities that also encourage the formation of immature components in imvs. successful lysis of the host cell is necessary to release the most mature intracellular virions. after maturing within a cell, most viruses must develop extra membranes before escaping. they may exit as an enveloped virus that can infect other cells, or they may choose to stay on the cell surface. mature intracellular virions can also be released when the cell's outer membrane is ruptured, either by mechanical stress or components of the host's complement system. recent studies have shown that several cellular proteins, including vacuolar protein sorting conserved oligomeric golgi cog7, and vps54, are essential for the viral replication cycle. identifying these proteins as host targets may provide viable intervention strategies for mpox infection, even if it is unclear how their interactions together exacerbate mpox-induced host disease.fig. 3schematic representation of an mpox life cycle. enveloped virion enters the host cell by fusion and the mature virion by micropinocytosis or fusion.fig. monkeypox infection immunopathology to spread, viruses must replicate inside host cells since they rely on the host and aim to disrupt cellular growth and immune control. mpox delays or blocks apoptosis, impairs antiviral host defense, and hijacks host cell machinery. although the virus was identified decades ago, the topic of human immunity to mpox infection has not been explored extensively. because of this, it is common practice to interact findings about mpox interactions with the host immune system from studies of vacv and related opxvs. monkeypox infection innate immune response the innate immune response to viruses serves as the body's initial line of defense against infection and is necessary for developing adaptive immunity. in the first step of the innate immune response, dna sensors such as cyclic gmp-amp synthase, dna-dependent protein kinase, and interferon-inducible protein recognize the viral dna genome. next, adaptor proteins like stimulator of interferon genes are activated, initiating innate immune signal transduction and leading to the production of a wide range of host defense molecules like ifn and pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. infection with the poxvirus triggers a cytosolic dna sensor, which then activates an adaptor, which triggers a cascade of downstream effectors to create interferons, cytokines, and interleukins. many genes related to immunity, such as those that regulate leukocyte chemotaxis and immune cell activation, were altered by the cowpox virus and mpox. most of these genes exhibited considerable upregulation after infection with cpxv and mpox, which may suggest that the hosts' antiviral response is not sufficiently subverted. this is supported by the finding that immune-related genes, including il6, were upregulated in response to modified vacv ankara infection of hela cells that had been attenuated but not in response to non-attenuated vacv wr infection. other studies have also connected increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines to cpxv and mpox infection. alkhalil et al. discovered increased il-gene expression after mpox infection of mk2 cells. after mpox or cpxv infection, significant secretion of il-il-and g-csf or il-il-and ccl-was observed in vivo in cynomolgus macaques. data from transcriptomic analysis of an in vitro infection model showed that mpox might inhibit the expression of the mapk-erk pathway and other components of the innate immune signaling system. the phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases /was also observed to be attenuated in an infected rhesus monkey tissue segment. however, mpox may cause many cytokine productions in critically ill individuals, including granulocyte-mabs yet colony-stimulating factor, il-and il-receptors.fig. 4this diagram shows how mpox infection may have an immunopathogenesis. the nk cell's ability to destroy virus-infected cells and release pro-inflammatory cytokines may be inhibited by mpox. by preventing t cell receptor trans-signaling, mpox may also obstruct the adaptive immune response.fig. to control mpox, natural killer cells are crucial. study results in infected rhesus macaques show that the mpox infection significantly increases the number of all nk cell subsets in the blood and lymph nodes. the resistance loci remain unknown, although most wild strains of lab mice are unsusceptible to opxvs. wild mice may be very susceptible to mpox. the cast/eij mouse strain is one of the few laboratory mouse strains especially vulnerable to opxvs because of low nk cell numbers and insufficient ifn response. these mice are protected from fatal mpox infection by receiving either ifn- γ or il-which promotes nk cell proliferation,,, ]. the studies showed that mpox affects nk-cell activities and suppresses ifn-α and tnf-secretion as well as c-c motif chemokine ligand c-x-c motif chemokine receptor and c-c motif chemokine receptor expression. changes in immunological mediators brought on by mpox infection are associated with sickness severity. regulating the complement system is one more method used by mpox to evade the immune system. the d14l gene encodes the mpox inhibitor of complement enzyme in the central african mpox strain but not in the west african strain; mopice hinders the formation of a c3 convertase complex.fig. 5this illustration shows how mpox infection may have an immunopathogenesis. the nk cell's ability to destroy virus-infected cells and release pro-inflammatory cytokines may be inhibited by mpox. by preventing t cell receptor trans-signaling, mpox may also obstruct the adaptive immune response.fig. humoral immunity to monkeypox recent studies have emphasized the significance of cellular and humoral immunity in the defense against poxviruses. the vital importance that vaccine-induced anti-body reactions play in protecting against re-exposure to poxviruses is a critical finding from this study. iga, igm, and total abs can be found using serological ab assays specific to certain mpox antigens. these primates generated different opxv proteins identified by the anti-mpox igg. vaccination results in a more limited serologic response to mpox than natural infection since the abs detected in smallpox vaccine recipients were specific to just opxv proteins. in the wake of the smallpox pandemic in the united states, scientists analyzed the prevalence of mpox infections among patients who had and had not had a smallpox vaccination. within the first week of infection, both groups showed signs of igm and igg abs. the igm levels in the unprotected group spiked more dramatically during the first two weeks of illness and were detectable for days compared to days in the vaccinated group. although the unvaccinated group had a more extended period of igg positive, the vaccinated group had a more strong igg response within the first days. monkeypox infection adaptive immune response t cells are essential for containing and getting rid of viral infections. the research also shows that wt mpox-z-infected animals produce a humoral and cellular immune response against the virus, as demonstrated by an increase in the number of memory b cells that are proliferating, the production of igg that is specific for mpox, the growth of ifn-γ/tnf-α—secreting t cells that are specific for opxv antigens, and the proliferation of memory t cells. beginning with the rise in viral loads found in infected animals, the adaptive immune response closely mirrored the management and healing of the mpox infection,, ]. t-cell-mediated cytokine responses after co-infection with varv and mpox were decreased by % when compared to responses after varv infection alone and by % when a low dose of mpox was administered. researchers demonstrated that mpox suppressed t cells that had been stimulated by varv and that mpox encodes the imm protein that varv lacks. an early gene product was discovered after infecting peripheral blood mononuclear cells with varv or mpox in the presence or absence of cytosine arabinoside, which inhibits the production of late genes. this was attributed to arac's ability to reduce the body's anti-cd3 responses. this suggests that an ancient gene was responsible for mpox's immunosuppression of t cells. hammarlund et al. postulated that mpox has similar immune evasion mechanisms to cpxv because mpox encodes a close homolog of cpxv203, which maintains a major histocompatibility complex class i in the endoplasmic reticulum. however, the mpox evasion mechanism prevented cd4+ and cd8+ t cell activation following cognate contacts with mpox-infected cells, protecting the viral reservoir from immune surveillance. even though mpox can infect primary human monocytes, antiviral cd4+ and cd8+ t cells were not able to identify infected monocytes. this demonstrated that virus-specific t lymphocytes were not stimulated to produce inflammatory cytokines in response to mpox. even though cd8+ t cells are well known to be essential for recovery from primary infection, recent research called into question their role in recovery from secondary poxvirus infections. b cell-deficient mice infected with ectromelia virus, a member of the same genus as the human smallpox pathogen varv, cannot recover from primary infection despite mounting a solid cd8+ t cell response, suggesting that abs are required for clearance of a poxvirus. in mice, protective ab responses to the poxvirus appear t cell-dependent and necessitate mhc-ii molecules, cd40, and b cells during a secondary infection,, ]. different types of vaccines for monkeypox infection it has been shown that smallpox vaccination provides % pre-immunization against mpox infection. approximately years afterward the stop of immunization, with the enhancement in the number of individuals infected with mpox, re-emergence of this disease was detected. therefore, mpox was categorized as an emergent disease via the who and development blueprint in . there have been hints since the 1960s that immunological responses unique to the vaccine may protect mpox. vaccination with dryvax or another first-generation smallpox vaccine offered complete protection against illness in almost all vaccinated animals in three experiments, including chimpanzees, rhesus macaques, and cynomolgus macaques. the only exception was an unusual animal that failed to produce a take following immunization. there are two confirmed accessible to prevent smallpox in the usa, such as acam2000 and jynneos. smallpox vaccinations show an effective defense that may be used to reduce the prevalence of monkeypox. the replication-competent, second-generation vaccinations, however, are not allowed since smallpox vaccines have side effects. the choice of antigens, vaccine platforms, vaccination regimens, and routes are all aspects of vaccine design. the relative immunogenic potency of vaccine-derived viral antigens, whether an immune adjuvant is necessary, and the type of protective immunity all depend on the vaccine platform selected. these characteristics also affect if a vaccine is appropriate for a particular immunization method and whether a prime-boost vaccination schedule is necessary to promote vaccine-mediated protective immunity and its longevity. additionally, choosing a respiratory mucosal vaccination route or a live attenuated viral vaccine will require more rigorous safety testing. however, the vaccinia vaccine or the newer jynneos ring vaccination approach may be helpful for early-identified close contacts. due to the extended incubation period of mpox, early immunization may decrease symptoms or potentially prevent the illness. although current vaccinations give cross-protection against mpox, they are not specific for the pathogenic virus. their effectiveness in light of the recent multi-country epidemic remains to be determined. furthermore, due to the elimination and halt of smallpox immunizations for four decades, mpox found a way to re-emerge, albeit with new features. in this part, we will look at some examples of how application types of vaccination platforms have been used to successfully induce distinct immune responses in preventive regimens against mpox infection. it is possible to classify the vaccine development platforms as either “traditional”, “recently licensed”, or “not yet licensed”.table 1the production method of first-, second-, and third-generation smallpox vaccines.table 1vaccine generationname of vaccinesthe production method of vaccinereffirst-generationdryvaxa live vacv preparation made from calf lymph is called dryvax®. lyophilization is used to purify, concentrate, and dry the calf lymph. in government vaccine stockpiles, a more recent vaccine made in labs is replacing the antigen extracted by scraping viruses from the skin of diseased calves.aventis pasteur smallpox vaccine another replication-competent vacv vaccine with a projected similar safety profile to acam2000® is apsv, held in the strategic national stockpile. currently, research is being done on vaccination. if acam2000® becomes unavailable, is challenging to procure, or is contraindicated for a specific person, apsv would be made accessible under an ind or eua for use in the case of a smallpox emergency.second-generationacam2000a clonally purified master seed stock of the vaccinia virus, derived from the strain of vaccinia used by the new york city board of health, is used to create it in cell culture. without the intrinsic mutations associated with serial replication, the clonally purified master seed ensures a more uniform vaccine, and the cell culture restricts accidental and bacterial contamination in vaccine manufacture.lister strain isolate of vaccinia in rabbit kidney cells thus, using rabbit kidney cells, the first second-generation lister-based vaccine, rivm, was created in . no additional passages were carried out during the creation of this vaccine; the virus was transferred directly from the calf lymph vaccine to cells. similar take rates and neutralizing abs were seen with the freeze-dried vaccine and the calf lymph-derived vaccine. in clinical trials, this vaccine was used in the netherlands and indonesia without leading to serious side effects.elstree-bnbavarian nordic's lister strain-based elstree-bn vaccine demonstrated safety and immunogenicity in monkey and human clinical studies beginning in . the embryonic cells of chickens were used in the experiment. similarly, a vaccine was developed in japan utilizing chicken embryo fibroblast cells before smallpox was eliminated; although its safety profile was adequate, its effectiveness was not.,, ]vacv lister/cepsanofi pasteur created a second-generation vacv vaccination by undergoing three passages in chicken embryonic primary cells using a batch of the first-generation lister vaccine. regarding immunogenicity and safety, lister/cep was comparable to the original first-generation lister vaccination.third-generationimvamunethe dermal vaccinia strain ankara ) is used to create modified vaccinia ankara; it was first isolated from a lesion on a horse and is now housed at the vaccination institution ankara in ankara, turkey. although initially developed to protect cattle against opxvs, mva has currently been researched as a main vaccination booster for at-risk human populations using the first generation of smallpox vaccine. over consecutive passages in primary chick embryo fibroblast cells suppressed mva.lc16m8on chorioallantois membranes, a clone of lc16 that produced small pocks, a trait associated with reduced growth capacity in mammalian tissues, was chosen to minimize the possibility of autoinoculation complications brought on by a prolonged pock reaction. in the primary rabbit kidney, the virus was passed through six more times at a low temperature before growing on cam. small pocks were isolated and designated lc16mo.. the lc16mo clones were grown on cam and passed through three additional prk cell passages before being chosen for small pocks. the last attenuated clone, designated as lc16m8.fig. 6infection with mpox and several vaccination platforms.fig. traditional vaccine methods for monkeypox conventional vaccines contain live vaccinia strains, live attenuated strains defective in one or more viral genes, and inactivated vaccines. the lv vaccines utilized in the extirpation attempts were not without adverse events and problems. they are among the most reactogenic of all fda-accepted vaccines. from a biodefense point of view, these vaccine harmlessness worries would be of secondary importance to the need to rapidly and effectively break the chain of transmission and include the prevalence. three smallpox vaccines are currently available in the national pharmaceutical stockpile of the united states: jynneostm, acam2000®, and the aventis pasteur smallpox vaccine, which could be used for smallpox under an ind protocol. inactivated vaccines since more than a century ago, inactivated vaccines have created immunity against viral infections. historically, purified inactivated viruses have been used to develop vaccinations. these vaccines have been proven to be both safe and effective at preventing illnesses brought on by viruses like the poliovirus and the influenza virus. compared to their live counterparts, this well-established method of vaccine manufacture is relatively easy to do and has a higher safety profile. to create significant amounts of antigen, the pathogen must first be grown on a substrate, a typical manufacturing process for all inactivated viral vaccines. these regrettable occurrences serve as a caution to all vaccine developers: viral epitopes required for induction of protective immunity should be conserved after inactivation since pathogen inactivation does not always translate into a vaccine that, by default, induces protective immunity. vaccines against inactivated viruses comprise whole viruses that have undergone chemical or thermal treatment. the surface proteins are denaturized by heat and chemicals like phenol and formaldehyde, rendering them inactive and non-infectious. some epitopes remain unaffected by the treatment of the entire virus, maintaining some of their integrity and triggering the production of abs to elicit an adaptive immune response. when a virus is injected, phagocytic immature dendritic cells break it into smaller antigenic fragments. these antigenic fragments are then presented as antigens on the surface of mhc cells, activating b cells and t helper cells. inactivated vaccines are risk-free and do not cause any side effects. since they cannot reproduce, they are heat-stable, non-infectious, and disease-transmissible. to induce a robust enough immune response, booster doses may sometimes be required since they are inadequate as a single dose and typically do not confer immunity for the same period as live vaccinations. live attenuated vaccines live attenuated vaccines have prevented more viral infections than other vaccines in history, and most current human vaccines for viral infections are safe la vaccines. la vaccines can inhibit completely viral diseases and outbreaks of related viruses and their variants. this vaccine method suppresses the appearance of vaccine‐escape and virulence‐increasing variants and preserves immunologically abnormal persons better in general. la vaccines against human viral infections have been among the most effective and economical therapies in medical history. in most parts of the globe, measles is under control, poliomyelitis is on the verge of extinction, and smallpox was declared eradicated in . using la viruses, produced by infecting and replicating inside cultured cells, is an efficient means of stopping the spread of several viral illnesses. however, empirical attenuation may be iffy, and lavs raise safety issues. to some extent, inactivated viruses and subunit vaccines address these issues, although they are still less effective than lavs. successful usage of live vaccinia vaccines suggests that they may be utilized without further phase iii testing. while the hazards have been studied and may be acceptable in the case of an epidemic, the formulation of the presently marketed items differs from the original product. it may need further stability and safety testing. large safety databases exist for the la lc16m8 and replication-defective vaccinia, which have been shown to protect nonhuman primates from the mpox challenge. lc16m8 a live, attenuated, cell-cultured smallpox vaccine called lc16m8 was developed in japan in the 1970s to replace first-generation vaccines like the lister and dryvax strains, which have rare but severe side effects. there were no adverse severe responses in a clinical study involving of the almost kids who got the lc16m8 immunization. both immunogenicity and efficacy were on par with first-generation vaccinations. because of its decreased virulence and replication competence, lc16m8 is a promising vaccine. an essential ev antigen, b5r, undergoes a frameshift mutation that causes the production of a shortened protein, which reduces the strain's pathogenicity. however, serious side effects such as encephalitis, encephalopathy, widespread and generalized vaccinia, ocular vacv infections, and cardiac dysfunction have been recorded in recipients and are very worrying. as a result, lc16m8 is seen as a possible replacement for the vacv vaccinations that are already available. a single lc16m8 vaccine protects nhps against mpox infection. post-exposure vaccination with lc16m8 for mpox-infected nhps improved clinical manifestation, but all naïve individuals were practically deadly. lc16m8 vaccination days before the mpox challenge protected nhps against mpox. this vaccine has been utilized mainly in japan, and current investigations in japan and the usa showed no safety concerns. however, present appropriation policies have concentrated on inactivated-virus vaccines; other countermeasures, including antiviral drugs and live-virus vaccines, also need proportionated appropriation. significantly, lc16m8 is stocked in japan, where it has been approved and effectively utilized for vaccinating non-immunocompromised persons, such as children. acam2000™ acam2000, a second-generation vaccination with a higher level of safety than first-generation vaccines, is likewise based on live varv. for use against mpox, this vaccine is presently accessible in the us thanks to an extended access investigational new drug application. the smallpox vaccine acam2000™ is produced utilizing cutting-edge cell culture technology and is derived from dryvax®. acam2000 has been associated with severe adverse reactions, just like the original vaccination. when given within three days of contact, smallpox vaccination post-exposure prevention is thought to be –% effective in preventing varv infection. however, its efficiency quickly dwindles following the onset of smallpox clinical signs. each vacv-based vaccine has been shown to produce potent t-cell responses and significant levels of neutralizing abs while having different safety and replication characteristics. the finding that vaccinia immune globulin may reduce vaccine side effects and can guard against smallpox infection emphasizes the significance of abs in immunity. additionally, whereas vaccine-induced abs alone are adequate for mpox challenge protection, abs are necessary for the rhesus macaque mpox infection model. in one phase i clinical study, one of the two phase ii trials, and both phase iii trials, the acam2000tm vaccine produced a poorer ab response than dryvax®. although the titer of neutralizing abs increased by a factor of four after acam2000tm vaccination, it was still roughly % lower than in those who had received the dryvax® vaccine. post-exposure administration of tecovirimat alone or in combination with acam2000 protects against a fatal mpox challenge, even if treatment initiation is delayed to the point where vaccination with acam2000 alone does not protect from severe mpox disease and mortality. that immunity acquired from surviving the initial mpox exposure due to treatment with tecovirimat is long-lasting and effective. acam2000 adverse events comprise fundamental symptoms, including fever, malaise, headache, muscle pain, and adenopathy. acute adverse events are infrequent but may happen, including skin infection, vaccinia gangrenosa, generalized vaccinia, stevens-johnson syndrome, inflammatory cardiomyopathy, idiopathic pericarditis, post-vaccination encephalitis, acute brain failure, and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis have been reported. jynneos™ jynneos, a more recent vaccination that also goes by the names imvamune and imvanex, gives protection against opxv and may be administered to immunocompromised people without risk. the jynneos™ smallpox/mpox vaccine is created using attenuated live vacv and cannot cause smallpox, mpox, or any other infectious illness. in –advisory committee on immunization practices examined the evidence supporting the use of jynneos, a vacv vaccine with replication defects, in place of acam2000. the acip voted overwhelmingly in support of jynneos as a replacement for acam2000 for the first immunization and booster shots in november . two vaccines are now available and advised for preexposure prophylaxis against opxv infection in persons at risk for such exposures due to these recommendations for using jynneos. third-generation smallpox vaccine imvamune has undergone testing in hiv-positive and atopic dermatitis-prone individuals. furthermore, various research using animal models have shown that protection against mpox is also possible. the risk/benefit ratio has been considerably shifted by the discovery of third-generation vaccinations with superior safety profiles, making them currently practical for mpox prevention. however, since they were created after eradicating smallpox, their capacity to stop natural human opxv infections has never been shown. investigations revealed that a standard dosage of imvamune injected subcutaneously was safe and well tolerated. more significant ab responses and the highest number of responders were produced by a double dosage of imvamune on day instead of day . by day after the double dosage, ifn-y elispot responses for groups + and + were similar. modified vaccinia ankara-bavarian nordic is given subcutaneously via injection and is often well tolerated. it may induce injection site responses and minor systemic adverse effects similar to other vaccinations. the fda has given the jynneos vaccine nonreplicating vaccine protection against smallpox and mpox. the jynneos and acam2000 vaccines, however, pose different difficulties. the acam2000 vaccine is a single vaccination that has can potentially cause severe adverse effects. in contrast, the jynneos vaccine is administered as a -dose regimen with a mild side effect profile. however, vaccination with acam2000 may be an option in areas that urgently require mpox vaccinations due to ongoing jynneos shortages that are impeding pre-exposure and post-exposure prophylaxis efforts. it is still unknown whether either vaccine will be effective in the current outbreak. in a novel investigation, researchers evaluated and compared the effectiveness of both vaccines versus each other and other vaccines on the market. they observed that using jynneos vaccines led to a better humoral immune response than acam2000. moreover, although the information was not statistically considerable, researchers showed that acam2000 led to more side effects, including myocarditis, than mva. the non-replicating character of jynneos inhibits the incidence of the side effects detected with other vaccines. aventis pasteur smallpox vaccine the aventis pasteur smallpox vaccine is a second-generation smallpox vaccine that is replication-competent. it is predicted that apsv will have a comparable effectiveness and safety profile as acam2000. a vacv seed from the new york city board of health strain creates the apsv. to make the vaccine, live vacv is combined with % glycerol, .% phenol, and .% brilliant green. in those who have never had poxvirus, the apsv vaccination is more than % effective. it is anticipated that the safety profiles of apsv and acam2000 would be comparable. it is less likely that young people who got the first dose of the smallpox vaccination from the nycboh strain of vacv may have serious side outcomes, but it is still possible. the three most frequent severe side effects from vaccination are encephalitis, increasing vaccinia, and vaccinatum eczema. similar to acam2000, it was anticipated that apsv would increase the risk of myopericarditis. when acam2000 is unavailable or inappropriate, the us fda has granted apsv an ind or emergency use authorization for use in specific cases. apsv could be utilized with an ind use when neither of the licensed vaccines are accessible. however, it is not recognized how efficient the apsv is versus mpox. previous investigations with other orthopoxviruses have demonstrated that smallpox drugs, including brincidofovir and cidofovir, could be utilized to treat mpox. however like the apsv, there is a science gap about their efficacy against mpox. dryvax one of the interferences for blocking and regulating mpox is vacv, first developed against smallpox. the three primary vacv-based vaccination types are as follows. first-generation vaccinations include live vacv, such as dryvax, used to eradicate smallpox in the previous century. dryvax, a live vacv smallpox vaccine, protects against both smallpox and mpox but should not be administered to those with impaired immune systems. a safe subunit protein-based vaccination that can elicit a protective ab response might be used instead of a live virus vaccine since abs to vacv mediate protection. smallpox vaccinations traditionally made from calf lymph and used to eradicate the disease, like dryvax, are based on replicating vacv. despite their excellent efficacy, they may have uncommon but serious adverse effects, especially in those with impaired immune systems. the adverse reactions are stevens-johnson syndrome, myo/pericarditis, fetal vaccinia, encephalitis, progressive vaccinia, eczema vaccinatum, and occasionally death. this vaccine has several side effects, such as generalized vaccinia, ocular vaccinia, and eczema vaccinatum, happened rarely, and deadly developing vaccinia related to immunodeficiency, postvaccinal encephalitis, and embryonic vaccinia during early pregnancy occurred infrequently. inflammatory cardiomyopathy, coronary heart disease, and idiopathic cardiomyopathy were newly identified side effects of smallpox vaccination. clone was particularly harmful in animal studies and was generated from dryvax, the vaccine most widely used in the united states during the smallpox extirpation effort. researchers found that their differential in pathogenicity may be attributed to the full-length ifn-α/β decoy receptor in clone and a truncated receptor in the clone used for the second-generation smallpox vaccine acam2000. when given to mice through intranasal, intraperitoneal, or intracranial injection, viruses expressing the full-length decoy receptor were more lethal than acam2000, and infection was made worse by t cell depletion. therefore, smallpox vaccinations with high rates of adverse effects and a dryvax clone obtained from a lesion in a patient with advanced vaccinia both have the full-length decoy receptor. novel vaccine method every vaccination works on the fundamental tenet that the vaccine may trigger an immune response faster than the pathogen. even though traditional immunizations gave animals the ability to create powerful neutralizing and preservative abs, these vaccines are allergenic, expensive, and time-consuming. they suggest the in vitro growth of harmful viruses, raising serious safety concerns. therefore, a safe and efficient vaccine should be produced to inhibit mpox. unlike conventional vaccinations, novel vaccine generation is highly secure and affordable. moreover, licensed vaccines and several other vaccine candidates are at different levels of progression. however, it will need accurate assessments to certify that they stimulate immunity equivalent to traditional mpox vaccines. to solve this problem, further tests require to be done to refine animal models for the evaluation of novel vaccines, as animal investigations utilizing several poxviruses can generate inconsistent outcomes, and non-human primate models do not entirely recapitulate human exposure to mpox. new vaccine methods against mpox include virus-like particles, recombinant protein, nucleic acid, and nanoparticle-based vaccines. protein subunit vaccine for monkeypox infection these difficulties may be solved by subunit vaccinations built on microbe fragments. only the pathogen antigenic components necessary to elicit efficient immune responses are included in subunit vaccinations. an antigen may be a polysaccharide, a nucleic acid, or a protein. the antigenicity of the vaccine's ingredients is a significant barrier to developing safe, effective vaccines. adjuvants are now essential parts of many vaccines and help to maximize the vaccine's protective effect by lengthening and intensifying immune responses. recent research has concentrated on a novel class of adjuvants targeting innate immune cells' pattern recognition receptors. targeting specific innate pathways with adjuvants has improved ab and t cell responses. innate immune cells are important immune system modulators because they orchestrate adaptive immunity responses. since recombinant protein or peptide vaccines often produce suboptimal immune responses, there is an urgent need for safe and effective vaccine adjuvants that boost immunization efficiency. examples of approved vaccine adjuvants include inorganic aluminium salts, the oil-in-water emulsion mf59, monophosphoryl lipid a absorbed on aluminium salts, and the toll-like receptor agonist cpg. tlr agonists have also been studied as vaccine adjuvants, along with cytosolic pattern recognition receptor activators such as stimulators of interferon genes agonists. according to a notion, vaccination adjuvants that imitate natural diseases, such as live attenuated vaccines, may activate innate immune-sensing pathways to create potent and long-lasting immune responses. subunit vaccines containing the membrane proteins a33, b5, l1, a27, and alum cpg were tested on primates for the etiology of smallpox. then, a lethal dosage of mpox was administered intravenously to the primates. whereas adjuvanted alum vaccinations only exhibited little protection, those with adjuvant cpg added provided complete protection and a more uniform ab response and more significant igg1 responses. these results provide encouraging evidence for developing a highly effective subunit vaccine against opxv infections as a safer alternative to live vacv immunization. in a study, two doses of an adjuvanted protein-based subunit vaccination protected nhp from a fatal mpox challenge. in an investigation to identify typical -mer antigenic epitopes, the mpox genome-encoded proteins were examined. the epitopes having the highest antigenic score among these were then selected for use in vaccine construction. the potential vaccine candidate was also characterized and validated using several in silico approaches, and research was done to get a better understanding of the molecular interaction with the human tlr4/md2 complex. in conclusion, researchers applied a machine learning technique to assess the immunological simulation profile of this new peptide-based vaccination in the mammalian immune system. with no reported adverse effects, this novel vaccine candidate has shown protection against mpox and may be employed shortly. reverse vaccinology, along with other bioinformatics and immunoinformatic tools, have been used in recent research to create a vaccine against mpox that specifically targets numerous viral proteins. the cupin domain-containing protein, the abc transporter atp-binding protein, and the duf192 domain-containing protein were all examined for their antigenic potential as extracellular proteins. b and t-cell epitopes were predicted from selected proteins to induce cellular and humoral immunity. the simulation findings showed a higher positive response from b and t cells after the immunization phase. in-depth computational modeling demonstrated that the suggested vaccine would stimulate an effective immune response against mpox infection, giving it a promising prospect for future clinical trials. researchers showed that the appropriate mhc-i, mhc-ii, and b-cell epitopes were chosen to develop multi-epitope vaccination constructions connected with acceptable linkers and adjuvants to increase immune responses to vaccine designs. the most promising epitopes discovered bound to mhc-i and mhc-ii alleles were also found to have high binding affinities and low binding energies between −.and −.kcal/mol. study results from immunological simulations indicate that immunization induced a protective immune response against mpox. finally, the suggested vaccination was stable against the mhc-i allele in a dynamic molecular study, exhibiting low root mean square fluctuations values. according to the researchers of this study, an essential protein in mpox pathogenesis is the cell surface-binding protein. due to its potential safety and effectiveness, vaccination using replication-deficient recombinant adenovirus vaccines may be preferred to live vacv vaccination. six distinct poxvirus glycoproteins, all of which are present on the surface of infectious vacv, were delivered as rad vaccines to mice. a deadly intranasal challenge with vacv was avoided four weeks after mice received a single intramuscular injection of rad encoding a27l. remarkable reductions in post-challenge morbidity were seen by week post-vaccination, and these improvements were linked to the development of neutralizing solid ab responses and the induction of individual polyfunctional t cell responses. rad-a27l vaccination was highly immunogenic and protective for at least weeks post-vaccination. therefore, the mortality and morbidity caused by poxvirus infection are likely preventable with a single-dose subunit vaccine expressing a poxvirus protein. in a study, researchers developed mrna and multi-epitopes vaccines vs. mpox using structural vaccinology and proteomics methodologies. to create mvc and mrna-based vaccines, cytotoxic t lymphocytes, b cells, and helper t lymphocyte epitopes were linked using the suitable linkers. the results of immune induction showed that the antigen titer after administration peaked on day five and that a sharp decline in antigen titer was observed upon the production of igm, igg, igm + igg, dendritic cells, ifn-γ, and il, demonstrating the ability of this vaccine to elicit an immune response against mpox. virus-like particles for monkeypox infection vlps are particles that self-assemble because of the expression of proteins encoding viral capsids, cores, or envelopes, or even preparations of monolayered particles obtained from a multilayered virus. vlps have a unique mix of high immunogenicity and outstanding safety characteristics, making them suitable platforms for vaccine development. since the first description of vlp-based hepatitis e virus vaccines, the field has made significant progress, and vlps are now the foundation of many marketed vaccines, including those against human papillomavirus, human immunodeficiency virus, and hepatitis e virus. foreign epitopes, such as those from nonstructural viral proteins or nonviral proteins, will be attached to or shown on the vlp in the future. the antigen delivery and the vlp's capacity to induce immune solid responses make for a powerful treatment strategy. almost any platform may be used to make vlps, and many different antigens can be attached to them, so the results frequently seem promising at first. naïve and immune individuals have had severe side effects after receiving the traditional vacv-based smallpox vaccination. despite the absolute risk of the illness and the known risks of the vaccination, there have been conversations about restoring live-vaccine injection because of the concern that it may be used as a biological weapon. during the vaccination drive in the united states before the iraq war, serious safety issues about the live vacv vaccine were uncovered. weak immunogenicity or using bacterial toxins as adjuvants in current killed-virus vaccine formulations for mucosal delivery leads to inflammation and autoimmune reactions. smallpox vaccination of the mucosa was studied using a nanoscale oil-in-water emulsion as a formulation for the killed virus. this study analyzed the immunogenicity and effectiveness of a nanoemulsions adjuvant mixed with vacv purified from tissue culture as a possible smallpox vaccine. their findings showed that ne inactivates vacv and that when administered to the nares of mice, this combination produces protective mucosal and systemic immunity. in conclusion, the study's authors established that a modified version of ne-inactivated vacv is an efficient mucosal vaccination that stimulates the development of ab in the mucosa, as well as systemic ab and th-cellular immunity. by mixing ne with the purified virus, this prototype vaccine is easy to produce and has the potential to be safer than live-viral immunization. blue water vaccines inc., a biopharmaceutical company working on transformational vaccines to solve major global health problems, announced plans to look into the possibility of making a new mpx vaccine using its norovirus shell and protrusion vlp platform. for example, bwv-for influenza, bwv-for gastroenteritis brought on by norovirus or rotavirus infection, and bwv-for malaria are all being developed using the company's s&p platform. in this new initiative, bwv will try to offer mpox antigens inside the s&p platform to create a vaccine candidate that might shield people against mpox. nucleic acid vaccines it is anticipated that vaccination-induced immunity would focus on the native antigens that diseases express. therefore, it is crucial to produce vaccine antigens that are identical to natural antigens immunologically. dna, mrna, or recombinant viral vector vaccines are examples of nucleic acid vaccines that inject the genetic material encoding the antigenic protein for the host to express. due to the host posttranslational alterations these proteins will experience, host glycosylation may change the antigen's structure and immunological effectiveness. dna-based vaccine for monkeypox infection due to their lack of replication, dna-based vaccinations have a good safety profile. in comparison to alternative methods, such as inactivated viral vaccinations, dna vaccines offer the following advantages: they can be generated fast at a large scale, are simple and quick to make using synthetic or polymerase chain reaction techniques, are safer than other methods, and are more thermostable than other forms of vaccines. additionally, dna-based vaccinations do not need to be kept in a cold chain, which makes them a fantastic substitute for the lack of vital, life-saving vaccines in places with limited resources. complementary dnas encoding desired immunogens are cloned into eukaryotic expression plasmids using recombinant dna technology. after being purified and amplified in bacteria, vaccine plasmids are then administered directly to the host being immunized. dna-based vaccines offer both benefits and drawbacks compared to classic immunization techniques. the immunogen's capacity to be presented by both mhc-i and ii molecules is its primary immunological benefit. highly active expression vectors based on those created for synthesizing recombinant proteins are used to get the most extraordinary immune responses. dna vaccines have been explored against various viral, bacterial, and parasitic infections due to their simplicity in development and testing,, ]. rhesus macaques were immunized by intradermal and intramuscular injection with the mpox orthologs of the vacv l1r, a27l, a33r, and b5r proteins, either alone or in combination with the corresponding recombinant proteins produced in escherichia coli. they found that animals given just dna had trouble producing significant titers. skin lesions appeared after the challenge and disappeared similarly to placebo controls. the protein-vaccinated animals, however, suffered from mild to severe sickness, yet they lived. dna-vaccinated and protein-boost recipients had mild diseases with no lesions or fewer lesions that cleared up within days. dna/protein vaccination resulted in th responses as well as binding ab titers to all four proteins, and these responses were inversely related to the total number of lesions. only a few numbers of linear b cell epitopes that are highly conserved across opxvs were identified by the sera of the inoculated macaques. their finding might direct future work on creating mpox and smallpox vaccinations that are easier, safer, and more efficient. in a separate study, scientists created the dna vaccine 4pox, which shielded nhp from the severe illness caused by mpox. the protective efficacy of the 4pox dna vaccine was tested in rabbits by challenging them with aerosolized rabbitpox virus. this model mimics the respiratory route of exposure and low dose associated with natural smallpox exposure in humans. researchers showed that after receiving the 4pox vaccination, rabbits did not exhibit any clinical symptoms and produced immunogen-specific abs, including neutralizing abs, demonstrating protection against rpxv aerosol. on the other hand, unvaccinated animals showed significant disease symptoms, such as lesions, and were put down. these findings indicate the protective potential of an unformulated, non-adjuvanted dna vaccine given intramuscularly. researchers found that a synthetic, multivalent, highly concentrated dna vaccine may induce polyvalent immunity in macaques and provide defense against a highly pathogenic mpox challenge. the vaccine is given via a unique, less invasive skin ep microarray. it has never been documented how such a varied, high-titer ab response may be elicited against several dna-encoded antigens administered concurrently in micro volumes. researchers vaccinated cynomolgus macaques with multivalent smallpox dna vaccine through the intradermal or intramuscular route to evaluate the effectiveness of these methods. they kept an eye on the scope, character, and effectiveness of the vaccine-induced response to ensure that it offered protection during a fatal mpox challenge. furthermore, they noted that the vaccination could stimulate an ab response that was broadly and powerfully binding and neutralizing, comparable to the reaction elicited by dryvax. additionally, solid cellular immunity was seen. a deadly poxvirus challenge in macaques was significantly impacted by the mix of immunological responses. mrna-based vaccine for monkeypox infection research has shown that the mrna therapy's prototype, direct mrna injection, expresses specific proteins that cause an immune response. with their high potency, possibility for safe delivery, cheap production costs, and capacity for rapid development, rna-based vaccines offer several benefits over conventional vaccination techniques. according to reports, the mrna-based vaccination induces a more significant cd4+ or cd8+ t cell response than protein immunization. clinical trials have shown that the two most used mrna vaccines are safe and effective against sars-cov-and its various mutations. to prevent another possibly catastrophic viral outbreak and all the severe health and economic impacts that would follow, it would be more accessible and purely based on the information gathered by the covid-mrna vaccines to build mrna vaccinations for mpox. the only immunization authorized by the us food and drug administration is modified vaccinia ankara-bavarian nordic. however, in the case of an mpox epidemic, the acam2000® smallpox vaccination and the experimental aventis pasteur smallpox vaccine will be accessible. in a study, scientists used the mrna sequences of chimeric monoclonal abs against the mv, c7d11, and the ev, c8a and c6c types of poxviruses, as well as those made by chimpanzees and humans. the safety and efficacy of using unmodified mrna that encodes the mabs c8a, c6c, and c7d11 in preventing smallpox infection were tested in a relatively large laboratory animal. investigators used a mouse vacv model to choose monoclonal ab target levels that showed therapeutic efficacy, in vitro translation, secretion, and biological activity of mrna constructs. only one day after giving rabbits an injection of a lipid nanoparticle encasing mrna, they found c7d11, c8a, and c6c in their blood. combining three lnp-created mrna constructs that encode distinct abs led to serum levels almost identical to those attained when each construct was given alone. their results provide some of the first evidence that numerous abs may be generated via mrna constructions in a big, nonrodent species. considering the experimentally set target serum level and the observed decay rate, the ab levels attained were, therefore, unlikely to provide protection. two mpox quadrivalent lipid-based nanoparticle mrna vaccines were created by researchers as part of a study. these vaccinations were created using the specific mpox antigens a29l, a35r, m1r, and b6r. mice are stimulated to produce mpox-specific igg and vacv-specific neutralizing abs by administering mrna-a-lnp and mrna-b-lnp twice intramuscularly. in addition, these vaccines induce effective mpox, particularly th-biased cellular immune response, also persisting effector memory t and germinal center b cell reactions in mice. a double injection of mrna-a-lnp and mrna-b-lnp protects animals against the vacv challenge. additionally, the passive transfer of sera from mice immunized with mrna-a-lnp and mrna-b-lnp protects naked animals against the vacv challenge. these mrna-based vaccinations seem to be effective and safe against mpox epidemics as well as against outbreaks brought on by other orthopoxviruses, such as the smallpox virus. in the usa, researchers created the polyvalent mrna vaccine mpxvac-against mpox and tested the immunogenicity of the vaccine in mice. using 2a peptides and codon optimization, five mpox viral antigens—a29l, e8l, m1r, a35r, and b6r—were connected in tandem. this vaccine induces widespread neutralizing abs, mpox-particular t cell reaction, and preservation versus vaccinia virus challenge. administration of mpxvac-did not produce considerable pathological alterations in mice. viral vector vaccines for monkeypox infection recombinant viral vectors have been employed to convey specific disease antigens for more than years. the first viral vector carrying a foreign gene was built on the sv40 virus in . viral vectors have some benefits over conventional subunit vaccines, one of which is that they trigger not only robust ab responses but also cellular reactions that are essential for destroying pathogen-infected cells. viral vectors may also produce long-lasting immune responses, in some situations, after only one dose, as well as solid immunogenicity without needing an adjuvant. moreover, it is possible to build viral vectors to deliver vaccination antigens to particular cells or tissues. there is still room to increase immunogenicity despite the licensed viral vector vaccines' good immunogenicity and effectiveness. genetic or molecular adjuvants may be a helpful strategy, particularly with vaccination vectors that only trigger mild or short transgene expression. in addition, it has been shown that heterologous prime-boost regimens, which combine different viral vectors or technologies, such as mrna vaccines, enhance the immunogenicity of homologous regimens, and they are likely to play a significant role in viral vector vaccine regimens in the future.table 2novel mpox vaccines in the development phase.table 2vaccine platformdescription of the vaccine compositiontype of the study and vaccine groupsresultsref.protein subunit vaccinecombining the adjuvants alhydrogel and cpg with the purified protein ectodomains of a33 and b5 derived from ev and l1 and a27 derived from mv.animal study: cynomolgus macaquesan adjuvanted protein-based subunit vaccination administered twice defended nhp against a fatal mpox challenge. additionally, it might be utilized to immunize those who reject vacv and to establish baseline protection against the poxvirus safely.protein subunit vaccine10 epitopes containing amino acid residues, the padre sequence, the ctxb adjuvant, and the necessary peptide linker. the adjuvant and the eaaak peptide linker are incorporated into the vaccine's n-terminal end. the padre sequence, which serves as a helper t cell epitope for triggering the ctl response in response to various antigens, was also connected to the eaaak linker.in silico studythe mpox epitopic vaccine design has shown excellently defined features regarding antigenicity, non-allergenicity, and physicochemical properties. the vaccine was produced using whole-genome-encoded proteins. researchers might thus conclude that the vaccine architecture they created is not only optimal but also efficient and secure to administer against mpox.protein subunit vaccinein a multi-epitope vaccination, the epitopes were linked by “gpgpg” linkers and to the adjuvant for cholera toxin b by another eaaak linker.immunoinformatic and molecular docking studiesthe modeling of the immune system revealed that the vaccination component stimulated more robust responses from both b and t cells. to induce an immune response against mpox, a novel risk-free and nearly symptom-free multi-epitope vaccination has been developed that target explicitly three potentially antigenic extracellular proteins.protein subunit vaccinemhc-i, mhc-ii, and b-cell epitopesin silico studya specific immune response to the mpox was discovered to be elicited by the vaccination, according to immunological simulation studies. the dynamic molecular investigation, which concludes, demonstrates that the vaccine is stable with a minimum rmsf against the mhc-i allele. studies concluded that one of the main proteins implicated in the pathogenesis of mpox is the cell surface-binding protein.virus-like particlenorovirus shell and protrusion vlp platform.developingin this new endeavor, bwv will try to present mpox antigens within the s&p platform to potentially develop a vaccine candidate that can shield people from mpox infection.dna vaccineplasmid dna encoding the mpox orthologs of the vacv l1r, a27l, a33r, and b5r proteinsanimal study: rhesus macaquesin one study, individuals immunized with dna and boosted with proteins had minor illnesses with no lesions or fewer lesions that went away in a matter of days. th responses and binding ab titers to all four proteins were induced by dna/protein vaccination, and these responses were adversely linked with the overall number of lesions. only a few numbers of linear b cell epitopes that are highly conserved across opxvs were identified by the sera of the inoculated macaques.dna vaccinea27, f9, h3, and l1 are the mv-neutralizing ab targets in the plasmid cocktail. researchers also incorporated the ev antigens a33, a56, and b5. in an mpox challenge model, the core antigen a4 was also used to increase the impact of cytotoxic t lymphocytes.animal study: cynomolgus macaquesthese findings show a considerable increase in the dna vaccine platform's effectiveness, producing immune responses that resemble those of live viral infections. they are considered relevant for developing vaccines against difficult-to-treat human and animal illnesses.mrna vaccineunmodified mrna that encodes three mabs, c8a, c6c, and c7d11.animal study: rabbitswhen the three lnp-formulated mrna constructs encoding the three different abs were injected together, the resulting blood levels were almost equal to those obtained when each construct was treated separately. based on the experimentally established target serum level and the observed decay rate, the ab levels achieved were not expected to offer protection. nanovaccine in recent years, proteins have been found in multiple copies on various nanoparticle types, including metals, polymers, lipids, and others, to extend half-life, promote a deposit effect, or primarily activate specific immune cells. the usage of protein-only nanovaccines produced by recombinant protein self-assembly, on the other hand, has been around for a while and offers a technique to meet the specifications of the ideal vaccine formulation. additionally, it avoids employing non-protein nanoparticles as carriers, which might be problematic if using xenobiotic, resistant, or poorly biocompatible materials because of potential adverse effects. an appropriate nanovaccine design aims to induce an efficient adaptive immune response that results in immunological memory. this describes a very long-lived surveillance system of specialized memory b cells that may accumulate many plasma cells via rapid clonal proliferation before maturing into cells able to produce particular ab in response to pathogen exposure. these specific abs ought to neutralize the virus and ultimately lead to viral clearance by preventing it from interacting with the host cell. the activation of cytotoxic cd8+ t cells is necessary for the elimination of virus-infected host cells in addition to the creation of neutralizing abs. the viral vaccines that are live-attenuated and inactivated may be seen as nanoparticles in and of themselves. a viral or non-viral nanoparticle may be a nanocarrier to encapsulate or convey the antigen payload or nucleic acid encoding the antigen rather than acting as the vaccine itself. nanocarriers may impart intrinsic adjuvant behavior and offer stability when delivering these payloads to antigen-presenting cells. target immune cells get both the antigen and the adjuvant simultaneously, thanks to nanocarriers. furthermore, not utilizing the nanoparticle antiviral vaccines frequently needs the help of adjuvants to trigger the immune systems successfully. virosome- and lipid-based nanoparticle vaccines were evaluated in the face of viral infection and demonstrated potential effectiveness in the human body. several studies have supported the promising efficacy of nanovaccines versus viral infections. such a study can be utilized to produce a nanovaccine that could inhibit the outbreak of the mpox while enhancing the immune reaction, especially with nanoparticles improving the delivery yield, delivering adjuvants, and slowly releasing packed factors,,,,, ]. for instance, researchers demonstrated in one study that an mrna-lipid nanoparticle vaccine encoding a collection of four highly preserved mpox surface proteins involved in virus binding, fusion, and transfer can stimulate mpox-specific immunity and heterologous preservation versus a lethal vacv challenge. to the four mpox antigens and the four vacv homologs, mrna vaccination induced more significant fc-effector th1-biased humoral immune responses than mva. it also produced superior neutralizing and cellular spread-inhibitory activities than mpox and vacv. during combinations of two, three, or four mpox antigen-expressing mrnas maintained against infection-related weight loss and death, single mpox antigen mrna vaccines showed relative preservation vs. vacv challenge. due to a combination of neutralizing and non-neutralizing ab activities, cross-conservation through multivalent mpox mrnas was much better than homologous preservation by mva. this material demonstrates essential vacv protection using an mrna-based vaccination that targets four highly protected viral surface antigens together with the induction of highly functional abs to reduce viral infection swiftly. in a different study, scientists created mrna-alab-lnp, a novel poxvirus vaccine that encodes the four vaccinia viral antigens a27, l1, a33, and b5. after a single injection, animals developed potent anti-l1-particular abs and controlled anti-a33, anti-a27, and anti-b5-particular ab responses. following the second injection, the ab responses to all four antigens were noticeably enhanced, with all igg titers above logs and the highest being anti-a33 igg. the high rate of binding abs revealed a significant ability to neutralize the vaccinia virus. exclusive ifn-γ reactions were shown to all four antigens, with the stimulation of the same antigen, a33, eliciting the most robust cellular response. this mrna-lnp vaccine, which encodes four vaccinia antigens, promoted immunity to mpox and the vaccinia virus, suggesting that the mrna-alab may be a contender for future manufacture of a vaccine against infection with mpox, smallpox, and likely additional orthopoxviruses.fig. 7in addition to facilitating effective vaccine delivery to tissues and cells, mpox nanovaccines also allow for the simultaneous delivery of adjuvants and antigens. furthermore, nanovaccines enable the potentiation of immunomodulation by multivalent antigens and, or adjuvants. when compared to conventional formulations, nanotechnology has the potential to increase therapeutic efficacy and change the viral vaccine market significantly.fig. current status of monkeypox vaccines according to the who's proclamation that mpox infection is a public health emergency of global concern, governments must fund early and timely efficacy/effectiveness research and ensure that they are prepared to introduce vaccination as soon as necessary. the who released interim guidelines on june noting that mass immunization is neither essential nor advised for mpox and encourages the prudent use of presently available vaccinations due to supply constraints. within collaborative vaccine effectiveness studies using standardized protocols and data collection tools, the who emphasizes the importance of supporting vaccination programmed with surveillance and contact tracing, as well as vital public health messaging and robust pharmacovigilance. the recommended postexposure vaccination for mpox prophylaxis is jynneos. the use of vaccinia immune globulin in postexposure prevention for severely immunocompromised individuals who may not establish an adequate immunologic response to jynneos and for whom acam2000 is contraindicated is currently under consideration. if general case prevalence becomes a problem, ensuring prompt and protocolized access to jynneos or vaccinia immune globulin should be a top priority for managing infection in immunocompromised individuals. jynneos, a replication-deficient mva, was suggested as an alternative to acam2000 for primary immunization in the newly released recommendations from the advisory acip in . due to the lack of a significant cutaneous response, the vaccine does not represent a danger for autoinoculation or unintentional inoculation. the vaccination is given in two doses, separated by days. for those who have come into contact with more virulent opxvs, a booster is advised every two years and every ten years for those who have come into contact with less virulent opxvs. the acip also suggested using jynneos as a booster for anyone who has received acam2000 as their primary vaccine. however, the scientists showed in a sero-study that although the illness severity is decreased, childhood immunization against mpox does not entirely protect against it. mva has shown a good safety profile in phase iii clinical assessments, large-scale vaccination investigations are still required, and mva has not been accepted for utilization in the public crowd to inhibit smallpox and mpox infections. furthermore, its cost is also one of the agents to be considered. therefore, acam2000 and mva vaccines are still the more significant elections for postexposure inhibition of mpox and smallpox. however, the availability also the possible safety worries of the acam2000 and mva vaccines are far from the global medical request. significantly, a novel investigation showed that immunization with jynneos stimulated partly low rates of neutralizing abs versus mpox. therefore, a safe, efficient, and available mpox-particular vaccine is immediately required to face the ongoing mpox epidemic. nucleic acid vaccines can safely and efficiently mimic the immunization of inactivated vaccines. furthermore, the large-scale generation of such vaccines is affordable and straightforward. mrna vaccine has been well shown as an efficient method to inhibit viral infections with benefits such as fast and scalable generation, excellent safety profile without nuclear entrance, and the capability to successfully stimulate humoral and cellular immune reactions. several investigations offered the advantage of utilizing lnps as a delivery system for the mrna vaccines since excellent progress was made in mpox inhibition. this is because these nanoparticles are considered a constant delivery method that can protect mrna integrity, preserve their cellular absorption, and improve the yield of their transfer and nucleic acid discharge in the host cells. additionally, issues that may be encountered when developing a nanovaccine for mpox and need to be addressed are vaccine affordability, capability to scale up, and durability in various environments because many mpox patients are in several counties that cannot afford strict storage and transportation requirements. moreover, it is crucial to thoroughly study and evaluate the toxicity, immune responses, and efficacy of nanoparticles on the transferring factor each time a nanovaccine is prepared for the mpox.table 3mpox vaccines in the advanced clinical development phase.table 3vaccine platformvaccine namevaccine informationrecruitment statusparticipantsclinical trials.gov identifierref.live attenuated, non-replicating vaccineimvamunewhile simultaneously assessing the immunogenicity and safety of the vaccine, imvamune®, among healthcare workers in the democratic republic of the congo, the trial will record participant exposure to and infection with mpox.active, not recruiting1600nct02977715live attenuated vaccinesvaccination with mva vaccine even while they feel that two doses of the mva vaccine used in post-exposure immunization may not prevent the disease, the centres for disease control and prevention believe that one rapid vaccination of high-risk contacts may minimize the severity of symptoms.recruiting226nct05438953live attenuated vaccinesmva-bnthis research will compare two intradermal mva-bn vaccination regimens to the typical subcutaneous regimen in phase randomized, open-label, non-placebo controlled, multi-site clinical trial. one-fifth and one-tenth of the usual dosage of mva-bn is delivered intradermally on days and respectively, as part of the two dose-sparing methods. the -dose conventional mva-bn subcutaneous regimen will be the comparative arm.recruiting210nct05512949live attenuated vaccinesimvanex®imvanex® was first used as a public health intervention for an mpox outbreak during the uk outbreak, and this study will give researchers a chance to measure and characterize ab responses to imvanex® given in a non-trial setting.completed120nct03745131table 4benefits and drawbacks of mpox vaccination.table 4monkeypox vaccineadvantagesdisadvantagesacam2000replication‐competent recombinant vaccinia viruses make vacv vaccinations typically safe and effective. since the vaccine does not include the variola virus, it cannot cause smallpox. it is provided as a lyophilized powder reconstituted with a packed diluent.possible adverse effects include itchiness, swelling, pain, fever, headaches, myalgia, weakness, and infection. other severe adverse reactions to vaccinations, in addition to myopericarditis and pericarditis, include encephalitis, progressive vaccinia, erythema multiforme major, eczema, vaccinatum, generalized vaccinia, post-vaccinal encephalitis or encephalomyelitis, blindness from autoinoculation, and fetal death in expectant mothers.lc16m18since it was successfully given to more than children in the 1970s, lc16m8, an attenuated, replicating smallpox vaccine developed from the lister strain of vaccinia, has been licensed in japan. in nonclinical studies, it was found to have significantly less neurotoxicity than vaccines that had not been attenuated. recent research in two different animal models has shown that lc16m8 is immunogenic after a single dose and has protective efficacy comparable to the only smallpox vaccine approved by the fda.common adverse effects include weariness, pruritus, lymphadenopathy, pain at the injection site, fever, headache, myalgia, and rash.jynneospeople with immune weaknesses may be vaccinated with a live, attenuated, replication-deficient vaccine since it has fewer side effects than some others and no serious adverse events.side effects that are often experienced include myalgia, headaches, tiredness, nausea, and chills. clinical studies did not have a sufficient number of participants years of age and over, which cannot be established by adequate human studies. the human data on expectant mothers that are currently available are insufficient to determine the risks of vaccination during pregnancy, and it is unknown if the vaccine is excreted in human milk. individuals under have not been studied for safety and efficacy. in addition to dna, vlps, replication-competent and replication-defective vectors, and novel protein or gene-based subunit methods, some have shown effectiveness against mpox in nhp. the results of the animal studies demonstrate that smallpox vaccinations induce immunological responses capable of providing significant and often total protection against mpox infection. all of these products will need to undergo a lengthy clinical development procedure that includes determining the protection's level of durability and a thorough safety assessment and formulation considerations to maximize stability. conclusion resources must be gathered to stop the worldwide spread of mpox, a disease that is now relevant and concerning globally. according to data, smallpox vaccination before infection may prevent mpox and alleviate clinical symptoms of illness. infants and young children, pregnant women, and those with impaired immune systems are probably at the most significant risk. the strategic national stockpile of the united states has two antivirals that might be employed, as well as smallpox and mpox vaccinations. only a few other nations have made similar preparations. jynneos, lc16m8, and acam2000 are approved mainly for groups at high risk for exposure to mpox. however, the availability also the possible safety worries of the acam2000 and mva vaccines are far from the global medical request. continuing assessment of available vaccines for safety and effectiveness in preventing mpox is essential. therefore, developing a novel vaccine with a wide range of use potential for mpox and its emerging variants could present a good preventive method to deal with the evolving mpox infection. according to various studies, mrna-based lnp induces more neutralizing abs, more effective mpox-specific t-cell responses, and protection against mpox than traditional vaccine methods. considering that the safety profiles of lnps relate to dose and combination and that long-time side effects, particularly following numerous dose use, cannot be seriously forecasted as data on long-time health results is clearly not accessible yet. more advanced studies should re-assess the disadvantages and advantages ratio before a continuing comprehensive utilization of mrna vaccines in low-risk individuals considered for life-threatening periods. in addition, to recognize the most efficient vaccine between traditional and novel vaccines, it is crucial to assess efficiency, including reactogenicity, cytotoxicity test, safety, and adverse effects, especially for high-risk and vulnerable patients. it is necessary to control and contain the mpox using the lessons learned from the covid-pandemic. it is essential to immediately create, produce, and license safe and effective countermeasures as the covid-pandemic spreads throughout the world. platforms based on nucleic acids can be ideal for such unanticipated situations. success will be determined over time, but the quick creation and testing of the now fda-approved mrna vaccines are unique. the next stage might be to test and approve preventive or therapeutic effector molecules, like abs, using nucleic acid technology. as shown by sars-cov-a responsive platform is probably necessary to keep up with an agent that is continually and quickly changing. the threshold toward such a therapy may be approaching fast, given how swiftly technology is developing in delivery and stability. furthermore, the groundwork for the rapid development of novel vaccine technologies to have an effect during the mpox infection has been laid by breakthroughs in bio/nanotechnology and enhanced nano/manufacturing with open reporting and data sharing. based on the available information, it is still necessary to create a new generation of mpox-specific vaccinations that are safe and efficient and either eradicate the virus or create innovative vaccine platforms before mpox is declared a pandemic. ethics approval statement not applicable. clinical trial registration not applicable. human and animal rights and informed consent this article does not contain any studies with animal or human subjects performed by any of the authors. consent for publication the authors guarantee that, once their material has been accepted for publication by the journal, they will not submit the same material or portions thereof to another journal. permission to reproduce material from other sources not applicable. data availability statement the data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. credit authorship contribution statement mohamed j. saadh: conceptualization, investigation, writing – review & editing. tahmineh ghadimkhani: data curation, investigation, writing – review & editing. narges soltani: investigation, software, writing – review & editing. arian abbassioun: investigation, visualization, writing – review & editing. renzon daniel cosme pecho: conceptualization, investigation, writing – review & editing. ali taha: conceptualization, investigation, writing – review & editing. tareq jwad kazem: conceptualization, visualization, writing – review & editing. saman yasamineh: writing – review & editing, writing – original draft, software, investigation, conceptualization. omid gholizadeh: writing – review & editing, writing – original draft, visualization, supervision, software, project administration, investigation, conceptualization. declaration of competing interest the authors declared no conflicts of interest regarding the research, authorship, and publication of this article.
the global monkeypox outbreak: a comprehensive review abstract monkeypox is a contagious illness that is caused by the monkeypox virus, which is part of the same family of viruses as variola, vaccinia, and cowpox. it was first detected in the democratic republic of the congo in and has since caused sporadic cases and outbreaks in a few countries in west and central africa. in july the world health organization declared a public-health emergency of international concern due to the unprecedented global spread of the disease. despite breakthroughs in medical treatments, vaccines, and diagnostics, diseases like monkeypox still cause death and suffering around the world and have a heavy economic impact. the reported cases of mpox as of january have raised alarm bells. vaccines for the vaccinia virus can protect against monkeypox, but these immunizations were stopped after smallpox was eradicated. there are, however, treatments available once the illness has taken hold. during the outbreak, most cases occurred among men who had sex with men, and there was a range of –days between exposure and the onset of symptoms. three vaccines are currently used against the monkeypox virus. two of these vaccines were initially developed for smallpox, and the third is specifically designed for biological-terrorism protection. the first vaccine is an attenuated, nonreplicating smallpox vaccine that can also be used for immunocompromised individuals, marketed under different names in different regions. the second vaccine, acam2000, is a recombinant second-generation vaccine initially developed for smallpox. it is recommended for use in preventing monkeypox infection but is not recommended for individuals with certain health conditions or during pregnancy. the third vaccine, lc16m8, is a licensed attenuated smallpox vaccine designed to lack the b5r envelope-protein gene to reduce neurotoxicity. it generates neutralizing antibodies to multiple poxviruses and broad t-cell responses. the immune response takes days after the second dose of the first two vaccines and weeks after the acam2000 dose for maximal immunity development. the efficacy of these vaccines in the current outbreak of monkeypox is uncertain. adverse events have been reported, and a next generation of safer and specific vaccines is needed. although some experts claim that developing vaccines with a large spectrum of specificity can be advantageous, epitope-focused immunogens are often more effective in enhancing neutralization. . introduction in recent years, there has been cause for concern due to a rapid and unprecedented pandemic of mpox infections in several countries all over the world. rodents and primates are the hosts for mpox, a zoonosis with symptoms like smallpox but less severe. when the virus was initially identified in monkeys in a danish laboratory in the term “monkeypox” was coined. the etiological agent of monkeypox, a zoonotic illness that can be transmitted to humans, is the monkeypox virus, which is a member of the orthopoxvirus genus that was originally mainly present in central and west africa. there have been numerous reports of human mpox from various countries that are not typically affected since may . with the large number of proven cases and stories of the virus passing between people and within a population, it has become a cause for concern all over the world. the large number of people confirmed to have mpox around the world currently stands at over and it is rapidly increasing in more than nations. the who declared it a public health emergency of international concern on july in order to alert the world of the danger it poses. since smallpox was eradicated in the mpox virus has been found to be the most prevalent orthopoxvirus impacting people. it produces a sickness that is identical to smallpox in humans. the signs and symptoms of the present mpox epidemic differ from those in the past, even though the virus was first identified many years ago. traditionally, the only genital sores associated with human mpox were ones that were all the same in appearance—pustular eruptions. the present monkeypox outbreak, however, is differentiated by genital rashes. additionally, the vaginal rash typically comes before the widespread pustular rash in non-endemic regions outside of africa. an initial infection in the genital region can cause a localized rash and, in rare instances, a subsequent widespread illness. additionally, skin lesions and prodromal symptoms are not significantly linked, and systemic symptoms are only present in around % of patients. the clinical syndrome is characterized by lymphadenopathy, rash, and fever. pneumonitis, encephalitis, sight-threatening keratitis, and subsequent bacterial infections are some of the possible side effects of mpox. skin rashes can present themselves at varying times, so medical professionals and scientists should be cognizant of this new reality, which is distinct from what has been observed in the past. many studies have shown that the way a person’s immune system works is closely linked to how their disease starts and worsens when they have a virus infection. immune escape is a common thing in orthopoxvirus infections and plays a significant part in how they spread. immunological patterns may serve as potential markers of disease progression and treatment targets for mpox. the association between intense mpox disease and immunological response is becoming more apparent, prompting a crucial infrastructure for guiding future investigations into mpox treatment. additionally, mpox-virus-induced immunological alterations and their potential immunopathogenesis should be further examined. in this review, we focus on transmission routes, proposed pathophysiology, epidemiology, clinical diagnostics, phylogenetic clades of the mpox virus and their evolutionary divergence, virology, vaccines, and treatment strategy for the mpox virus in an update. . transmission route associated with mpox the current research implies that monkeypox may spread in three different ways: from person to person, via direct contact with infected organisms, and from animals to people. it is well established that animals can pass the mpox virus on to humans. the majority of the animals that are known to be carriers of the virus are rodents, such as rats, squirrels, and dormice, as well as numerous kinds of primates. on the other hand, there is evidence of a human-to-human transmission that has occurred not just in africa but also outside the continent. direct contact with skin lesions of infected animals or people, respiratory exposure to droplets from infected humans, and consumption of contaminated bushmeat are all potential routes of transmission for the mpox virus. during the current outbreak of the illness, researchers have shown that it is more prevalent in men who engage in sexual activity with other men. most cases of mpox have been identified in men who have had sex with other men. the cdc reports that transmission can occur through contact with an infected person. furthermore, semen analysis for many patients has revealed the presence of monkeypox-virus dna, which is a novel finding. the virus may pass from one person to another by respiratory contact, direct contact with body fluids from an infected person, or during pregnancy from the mother to the fetus. given that the pathogenic mpox virus can be isolated from samples of semen, there are signs that transmission may happen during sexual intercourse. the mpox virus could be stored in the genital area if it stays in seminal fluids for a long time. whether the virus can spread via vaginal secretions is unknown. even with adequate personal protective equipment, the virus may spread through fomites or by indirect contact with lesion material, such as through contaminated bedding, most commonly through inhalation. sharing a bed or room or using the same utensils as an infected individual are risk factors for transmission. factors involving the introduction of the virus to the oral mucosa are linked to increased transmission risk. it is still unknown whether those who do not have monkeypox symptoms can transmit the virus. currently, further study is being conducted to better understand how this particular strain of the west african lineage spreads, although the general consensus is that it is not unique. as far as we know, it does not disperse in the air like covid-. mpox, in contrast to covid-is not communicable until the infected individual develops symptoms. therefore, it is much simpler to keep sick people apart and stop the spread of the disease. the transmission routes are explained in figure . . proposed pathophysiology of mpox virus the mpox virus is categorized as a category of the genus orthopoxvirus under the family poxviridae. macropinocytosis, endocytosis, and fusion are the three mechanisms through which poxviruses enter the cells of their hosts. the dna that makes up the mpox-virus genome is linear and double-stranded. the life cycle of the mpox virus takes place in the cytoplasm despite the fact that it is a dna virus. replication of viral dna, transcription of viral genes, and assembly of viral particles all need the presence of certain proteins. the two primary forms of contagious virions generated by compromised cells are intracellular mature virus and extracellular enveloped virus. these infectious virions are likely to be the most prevalent forms of the virus. eevs are capable of moving quickly through an infected individual’s body to reach different areas, whereas imvs are what spread the virus from one cell to another. the mpox virus has been divided into two separate genetic groups, west african and congo basin, which is also called the central african group. the cb clade has been observed in areas ranging from cameroon’s central and southern areas to the drc, whereas the wa clade has been reported from cameroon’s western areas to sierra leone. it is commonly assumed that the wa clade is more likely to cause epidemics through spillover from animal hosts, whereas the cb clade is considered to be the most hazardous, as it is capable of sustained human-to-human transmission with intense secondary attack rates. moreover, the wa clade produces the mildest symptoms, whereas the cb clade is seen as the most dangerous. the mpox-virus genome sequence of the current strains found in europe fits the west african clade, according to recent sequencing data, indicating a milder version of the disease, although this has to be validated. additionally, the mpox virus has three additional entry points into its host: the oropharynx, the nasopharynx, and intradermally. at the location of the vaccination, the virus multiplies before spreading to nearby lymph nodes. the virus spreads to other bodily organs after an initial phase of viremia. the mpox virus resembles other recognized orthopoxviruses in terms of appearance. the mpox virus has an exterior membrane made of lipoproteins and is oblong or brick-shaped. the pandemic in the west african clade in the united states provides proof that the disease’s intensity may differ between clades. humans and other primates are frequently less severely affected by west african monkeypox infections than animals. despite this, there were no fatalities reported during the epidemic that occurred in the united states in despite the fact that numerous people were hospitalized. the congo mpox virus causes t-cell activation via the t-cell receptor. it is interesting to note, though, that when human cells are produced from people who have already contracted the monkeypox virus, the generation of inflammatory cytokines is suppressed. this shows that the mpox virus may create a modulator that inhibits the responses of the host t cells. the central african clade has a complement-inhibiting gene, whereas the west african clade does not. it is an immune-modulating factor that may boost the central african clade’s pathogenicity compared to that of the west african clade. apoptosis in the host may be precisely modulated, which suggests that the central african monkeypox clade preferentially downregulates host responses in comparison to the west african clade. three west african strains and one central african strain were compared. the results showed a nucleotide difference of .–.% between the central african strains and the west african strains. two viral strains were discovered to have distinct clusters through genomic research. whereas the west african strain is anticipated to contain unique genes, the central african strain has distinct functional genes. the two strains differ in their virulence; thus, virulence genes were looked at, and of them were present in both strains. the orthologs of br-br-and cop-c3l are where the two strains diverge most noticeably from one another. cytosolic mpox-virus pathways for the viral life cycle are shown in figure . . epidemiology the mpox virus was first reported in in laboratory monkeys employed for research purposes at state serum institutes in copenhagen, denmark, as well as in africa. humans in sub-saharan africa have been infected with monkeypox through intimate contact with diseased animals, suggesting that the disease has been present for thousands of years. mpox was formally recognized as a different illness in when the smallpox-eradication campaign revealed a continuing occurrence of smallpox-like disorders in rural regions. imported human mpox-virus infections beyond the african continent have been infrequent in the last years. mpox has gained attention as a disease of global public-health significance since the first outbreak in the united states in which was linked to an infected pet prairie dog. it was believed that native prairie dogs housed alongside rats from ghana introduced in western africa were the main source of the pandemic. this is because most infected individuals became ill after coming into contact with pet prairie dogs in the summer of a cluster of illnesses in the us midwest was attributed to mpox. the main cause of the epidemic was believed to be native prairie dogs that were kept with rats imported from ghana in western africa. this conclusion was reached as the vast majority of those who became infected fell ill after being in contact with pet prairie dogs. since many cases of mpox have been reported in a variety of countries, with nigeria experiencing the worst epidemic in . in two individuals with secondary mpox illness were reported by the united kingdom after they visited nigeria. over the past five years, there have been multiple cases of human mpox identified in areas all over africa. mpox has also spread to other areas, such as singapore, israel, the united states, and the uk. on may the uk health security agency announced a confirmed case of mpox in a person who had recently traveled to nigeria. by january the world health organization had received suspected and/or confirmed cases of mpox from countries, with the majority of cases occurring in europe and the americas, resulting in fatalities around the world. according to an epidemiological-modeling study, the ro value for mpox varies from .to .in countries with little exposure to orthopoxvirus species. ro is also known as the reproduction ratio, and it is used to determine the disease’s transmissibility. this score indicates that an mpox pandemic is poised to break out in the case of imported human or animal cases. as previously noted, the stated ro indicates that each infected person has the ability to infect one to two other people. because the virus is infectious, an infected individual must take special steps to isolate themselves and prevent contact with others. globally, the number of weekly reported new cases dropped by .% in week compared to week . the bulk of cases recorded in the last four weeks were from the americas region and the african region. the united states of america, brazil, spain, france, colombia, the united kingdom, peru, mexico, germany, and canada are the ten most afflicted nations worldwide listed in figure . these top affected nations account for .% of all cases recorded worldwide. in the last seven days, nations have reported an increase in the weekly number of cases, with costa rica reporting the largest rise. in the last days, nations have reported no new cases. according to the cdc, india has had a total of cases and death due to the mpox virus. mpox showed up out of the blue in several countries and regions, but there was no initial epidemiological link to areas where the mpox virus has always been common. this suggests that transmission has been going on for a long time without being noticed. therefore, the monkeypox epidemic needs to be looked at with an open mind and with care. the world health organization reports a moderate risk to the entire world. however, the risk is high in the americas region and moderate in the africa, eastern mediterranean, europe, and south-east asia regions, according to the who. in contrast, the risk is believed to be low in the western pacific region. . clinical symptoms and diagnosis of mpox virus mpox is a virus belonging to the orthopoxvirus genus and has a clinical presentation similar to smallpox. its incubation period in humans typically ranges from four to days but can be as long as days. the disease begins with a febrile prodrome, which is accompanied by headache, muscle aches, backache, exhaustion, sweats, and fatigue. one to three days after the onset of fever, a rash appears on the face, inside the mouth, and on the hands, feet, chest, genitals, anus, and eyes. this rash begins as a flat macula and then becomes a papule before forming a vesicle filled with clear liquid. this clear liquid then turns into a yellowish liquid and forms pustules. once the pustules, crusts, and lesions fall off, the patient is no longer considered infectious. however, scarring from the rash is a common outcome of an infection. more severe complications such as pulmonary distress, bronchopneumonia, ocular infections, corneal scarring, and even permanent damage, as well as lymphadenopathy, may also occur. it can be difficult for clinicians to differentiate mpox from other viral or nonviral diseases due to its nonspecific clinical presentations. therefore, laboratory diagnosis is imperative. in order to accurately diagnose mpox, health providers should collect an appropriate specimen and send it securely to a suitable laboratory. this is because verifying human mpox virus depends on the type of sample and the available laboratory tests. the symptoms of this disease are very hard to distinguish and difficult to manage in low-income countries, which is why it is a global issue, as these regions are seen as endemic with the disease. the confirming processes for examining specimens and determining mpox virus are genetic, phenotypic, and immunological methods. table lists the types of monkeypox tests that can be implemented to identify human mpox virus, and these strategies are more effective when combined with medical and epidemiological data, such as the patient’s immunization history. . phylogenetic clades of mpox virus and their evolutionary divergence phylogenomic studies indicate that there are at least three distinct clades of the mpox virus—clade associated with west africa; clade connected to the congo basin; and a novel clade proposed following the european outbreak. although the clinical appearance of smallpox and mpox viruses are similar, the three clades suggest a distinct evolutionary divergence. the mpox virus is capable of infecting its host through various pathways, including the oropharynx, nasopharynx, and intradermal routes. it multiplies at the site of vaccination before eventually spreading to the lymph nodes. once the initial viremia phase has passed, the virus proceeds to spread to other organs. the mpox virus has an outer membrane composed of lipoproteins and is similar in appearance to other orthopoxviruses, typically presenting as an oblong or brick-shaped structure. the mpox virus requires specific proteins to be present for it to replicate its dna, transcribe its genes, and assemble its viral particles. its genome consists of linear, double-stranded dna, but the virus undergoes its life cycle in the cytoplasm, indicating its classification as a dna virus. there are three different ways in which poxviruses can enter the cells of their hosts: macropinocytosis, endocytosis, and fusion. the poxviridae family includes viruses with double-stranded dna that can affect many creatures, such as birds, reptiles, insects, and mammals. it can be divided into two subsections: chordopoxvirinae and entomopoxvarinae. monkeypox is part of the poxviridae family, the chordopoxvirinae subfamily, and the orthopoxvirus genus. the poxvirus species variola, cowpox, monkeypox, vaccinia, camelpox, alaskapox, yaba monkey tumor virus, tanapox virus, orf virus, pseudocowpox virus, bovine papular stomatitis virus, buffalopox, and molluscum contagiosum have all been identified as causing illnesses in humans. variola and molluscum contagiosum require humans as their main host. the mpox virus has been able to endure for quite a while in wild animals because of its huge range of potential hosts, and has sporadically spread to humans through spillover events. the significant aspect of orthopoxviruses is that they demonstrate immunological cross-reactivity and cross-protection, meaning that being infected with any one of these viruses will provide some level of protection against any other member of the same genus. viruses with a genome of –kb and a brick-like shape can range in size from –nm and are known as orthopoxviruses. there are more than gene codes in the orthopoxvirus genome, and though some of them are not necessary for virus replication in cell culture, they may play an important role in the host’s antiviral defenses. all poxviruses utilize intricate molecular pathways in order to complete their replication cycle in the cytoplasm of infected cells. substantial study has been conducted on the intracellular-replication cycle of the vaccinia virus, the vaccine developed from which helped eradicate smallpox worldwide. other poxviruses share some of its important components. two distinct types of the virus, the internal mature virion and the external wrapped virion, which possess different surface glycoproteins, could potentially initiate the infection cycle. it is thought that glycosaminoglycans, which are found on the surfaces of mammalian cells, are necessary for the virus to attach itself to the cell membrane, even though not all cellular receptors have been determined. it is believed that millions of people worldwide perished due to smallpox. smallpox is widely regarded as one of the most feared infectious diseases in human history. the consequences of the disease are a reminder of the destructive capacity of orthopoxviruses. despite the lack of clarity around the origins of smallpox, there is some evidence to suggest that the variola virus may have descended from an ancient rodent poxvirus. people have been aware for a long time of the danger of zoonotic orthopoxvirus diseases such as the mpox virus to both humans and other animals. due to the suspension of smallpox-immunization programs over years ago, a large portion of the global population has no immunity to smallpox and zoonotic orthopoxviruses. this raises the possibility that a zoonotic orthopoxvirus like the mpox virus may gain the ability to spread more easily among humans if certain conditions are met, such as an increase in human infections and the continued absence of vaccination protection. researchers must focus on the virology of how pox viruses are altering normal cells and damaging organs. . vaccines for mpox virus in order to prevent the spread of the mpox virus and protect people from it, there are multiple steps that must be taken. vaccines are the most effective way to achieve this goal, yet unfortunately, there is currently no specific vaccine for the mpox virus. however, research has revealed that the same smallpox vaccine that was used to protect people against smallpox may be effective in protecting against the mpox virus as well. previous knowledge shows that receiving a smallpox vaccination could result in a reaction to the mpox virus and may be able to protect from being infected by the virus by up to %. the food and drug administration has approved acam2000, a second-generation smallpox vaccine, to be used to prevent exposure to smallpox during an outbreak or crisis. therefore, it has been acquired for the strategic national stockpile and is available to be used for a range of demographic groups. furthermore, jynneos was authorized to be used in the united states and canada in after a series of animal studies. clinical trials have also demonstrated its strong effectiveness and safety, which can be used to protect people in many different age groups from getting infected with the mpox virus. the approval was due to the effectiveness in animals, the safety profile in humans, and the evidence that jynneos had a similar immunogenicity to existing smallpox vaccinations. in addition, due to the verified protective effects in animal studies and the immunizing action seen in human trials, the us food and drug administration’s emergency investigational new drug program approved lc16 both in the us and in japan. no data exists on the efficacy of lc16 for avoiding mpox-virus infections, even though it is the only smallpox vaccine available for kids. it is essential to note that when taking pre-exposure precautions, these vaccinations can often stop mpox-virus infection. yet, experts have demonstrated that post-exposure immunization may be able to stop the onset of serious diseases or reduce the intensity of the issues experienced by those who have been infected with the mpox virus. in this scenario, it is recommended to get vaccinated promptly after being exposed. the centers for disease control and prevention has confirmed that vaccination within four days of exposure can prevent the onset of illness. if this window is missed, the disease may still occur, but immunization in the first two weeks can help to avoid more serious consequences. currently, three vaccines for orthopoxviruses are accessible: acam2000, jynneos, and lc16. the initial vaccine, acam2000, is a replicating vaccine; however, the other two vaccines are either non-replicating or minimally replicating. in the food and drug administration and the united states government gave acam2000 a permit to treat smallpox and monkeypox. from to it was the only monkeypox vaccine that could be purchased in the united states. cell-culture techniques were utilized in both france and the usa to create acam2000. those aged from to were allowed to use it. emergent biosolutions manufactured this second-generation, replication-capable, live-attenuated, plaque-purified vaccine. the scarification technique with a bifurcated needle is used to deliver the vaccine percutaneously by repeatedly injecting it into the surface of the skin. this single-dose vaccine grants maximum immunity days after immunization. people exposed to highly virulent orthopoxviruses require booster doses every three years, whereas those exposed to low-virulent orthopoxviruses must be administered booster doses every years. the mva-bn vaccine created by bavarian nordic is a third-generation, live-attenuated, nonreplicating ankara vaccine. it is a two-dose vaccination that must be taken days apart in order to generate immunity. clinical trials indicated that a substantial antibody response was seen after the initial dosage. following the second dose, immunity was established. those exposed to highly virulent orthopoxviruses need to receive a booster shot every two years, whereas those exposed to low-virulence strains need one every years. in this vaccine was given the green light by the fda for use in canada to prevent smallpox and monkeypox in adults aged and older who are at high risk. km biologics created a third-generation vaccination called the lc16 vaccine, which was granted a license for use against smallpox in japan in and against monkeypox in the usa in . this live-attenuated, minimally replicating vaccine was made using cell-culture techniques and has an immunogenic-membrane protein b5r that has been eliminated. a bifurcated needle is used to percutaneously administer the multidose vaccination, which is suitable for individuals of all ages, including newborns and toddlers. it is essential to look into the reactogenicity, safety, and any possible adverse effects of the vaccine in order to ensure the most effective selection, especially for those in high-risk and vulnerable groups. for example, there are various vaccines that can be used for healthy individuals, such as those that are nonreplicating, slightly replicating, and replicating. researchers need to make a vaccine specifically for the monkey-pox virus to increase protection against the virus. . treatment for mpox a total of cases of mpox infection as of january have alarmed the world. historically, immunization against the vaccinia virus could safeguard against mpox; however, since smallpox was eradicated, this type of vaccination has ceased. consequently, therapeutic options for those already infected are of considerable importance. no antiviral drugs that have been approved by the american food and drug administration are specifically created to target the mpox virus. however, other medications such as tecovirimat and brincidofovir, both of which are effective against smallpox, as well as cidofovir, an antiviral approved to fight cmv, have been shown to be effective against orthopoxviruses in laboratory experiments. in the us food and drug administration approved tecovirimat for the treatment of smallpox in adults and children. this medication works by preventing vp37, a viral-envelope-wrapping protein, from functioning properly and blocking viral replication and release. it is currently available in the us free of charge under an expanded-access investigational new drug protocol. tecovirimat can be taken orally or intravenously. although there is not enough evidence yet to show how effective it is for treating mpox, it has been reported to have mild side effects like headache, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and neutropenia in one trial participant. the use of an intravenous formulation may lead to redness, pain, and swelling at the area of infusion. in june the fda approved the use of brincidofovir against smallpox in both adults and children. this prodrug of cidofovir comprises a lipid conjugate and is converted to cidofovir diphosphate within the cells, which inhibits the viral dna polymerase, eventually stopping the replication of the virus. although there is a dearth of data on the use of brincidofovir against mpxv, animal studies have revealed that when treatment was administered at the appropriate time, infected prairie dogs had survival rates of between and %. adler et al. reported three cases of human mpox that were addressed by administering brincidofovir. however, the treatment was discontinued due to a rise in the levels of liver enzymes. an advantage of brincidofovir over cidofovir is that it is available in both pill and liquid forms and is smoother on the kidneys. cidofovir and its prodrug, brincidofovir, have the same method of working. there is a lack of evidence from humans on the effectiveness of cidofovir against monkeypox, but there are animal studies that show that it is useful against orthopoxviruses such as cowpox, vaccinia, ectromelia, and rabbitpox. thornhill et al. mentioned cases from the mpox outbreak being treated with cidofovir, which is only obtainable as an intravenous formulation but can carry a risk of severe renal toxicity. in the treatment of the mpox virus there is no specific treatment available in the current outbreak, so researchers should work on a treatment strategy. in figure below, the life cycle of mpox virus inside the host-cell cytoplasm is illustrated to elicit the mechanism of action of three different antiviral therapies: cidofovir, brincidofovir, and tecovirimat. . challenges currently, operational research faces challenges in understanding the dynamics of monkeypox transmission and control due to limited resources for detailed case investigations and contact follow-up in affected communities. a serious issue is the lack of adequate diagnostic facilities in laboratories. the difficulty in diagnosing the mpox virus arises from the insufficiency of laboratory-diagnosis capacity and access, making it challenging to identify any underlying etiology. to comprehend the epidemiology and subclinical infection among contacts in communities, a seroprevalence study is crucial. however, currently available serological assays are generic orthopox tests, and they cannot specifically identify the mpox virus due to cross-reactivity between the mpox and smallpox viruses. hence, it is challenging to distinguish between mpox-virus infection and prior smallpox vaccinations or other orthopoxvirus infections. moreover, these assays are not available on the marketplace. data collected from nigeria reveal that approximately % of monkeypox-negative patients with a rash illness that had similar antigens also had orthopox antibodies. in addition, there is no specific antiviral treatment for mpox. treatment is primarily supportive, focusing on managing symptoms such as fever and rash. vaccination with the smallpox vaccine can provide some protection against mpox, but the vaccine is not widely available in many countries. further research, including molecular and genomic approaches, is necessary to identify other orthopoxviruses transmitted in human and animal populations. . conclusions and future prospective mpox is a viral disease that is closely related to smallpox and primarily found in remote parts of central and west africa. there is currently no specific vaccine for mpox, but the smallpox vaccine provides some protection against the disease. however, the smallpox vaccine is no longer routinely administered, and many younger people in africa may not have received it. several vaccines are being studied for their potential effectiveness against mpox, including live-attenuated mpox vaccines, dna vaccines, and recombinant vaccines. synthetic peptide-based prototype vaccines have also shown promise in preclinical studies, and researchers are investigating the use of mrna vaccines for booster purposes in those who have received the mrna vaccine for covid-. overall, the development of effective vaccines for mpox is an ongoing area of research, and scientists are working to develop new vaccines that can protect against this rare but potentially serious disease.
a comprehensive review on monkeypox viral disease with potential diagnostics and therapeutic options abstract the purpose of this review is to give an up-to-date, thorough, and timely overview of monkeypox, a severe infectious viral disease. furthermore, this review provides an up-to-date treatment option for mpox. the monkeypox virus has remained the most virulent poxvirus for humans since the elimination of smallpox approximately years ago, with distribution mainly in central and west africa. mpox in humans is a zoonotically transferred disease that results in symptoms like those of smallpox. it had spread throughout west and central africa when it was first diagnosed in the republic of congo in . mpox has become a major threat to global health security, necessitating a quick response by virologists, veterinarians, public health professionals, doctors, and researchers to create high-efficiency diagnostic tests, vaccinations, antivirals, and other infection control techniques. the emergence of epidemics outside of africa emphasizes the disease’s global significance. a better understanding of mpox’s dynamic epidemiology may be attained by increased surveillance and identification of cases. . introduction monkeypox is an uncommon disease caused by infection with the monkeypox virus, with a mortality rate of –% depending on the clade, which was first identified in wild animals such as rats and primates before spreading to humans. it was first detected in laboratory monkeys in and examining blood from african animals revealed mpox infection in various african rodents. the mpxv can infect a wide range of animals, such as a variety of squirrel species. there are still a lot of unclear questions about the mpxv’s natural history. additional research is required to identify the precise reservoir and clarify how the virus spreads among wild animals. the first case of mpox in humans was reported in in the democratic republic of congo, where an outbreak of smallpox was already occurring. before that, this virus outbreak was seen in monkeys in where pox-like disease was observed in the monkeys. the mpxv is a double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid zoonotic virus belonging to the poxviridea family’s orthopoxvirus genus. the mpxv has been divided into two distinct clades, the west african clade and the central african or congo basin clade. the cb clade was formerly believed to be more infectious and to produce more serious illness. the geographic boundary between the two groups is cameroon, which is the only country where both viral clades have been identified. the current outbreaks going on outside of africa are due to wa clade, which is significantly less virulent than cb clade. the rest of the world is also affected by mpox, making it a severe public health concern because it is not limited to countries in west and central africa. in the united states experienced its first mpox outbreak, which was traced back to prairie dogs kept as pets that had been infected. rats and dormice were brought to the us from ghana, where they shared a cage with the pets. over people in the us contracted mpox due to this outbreak. there have also been reports of mpox in nigerians traveling to israel in september the united kingdom in september december may and may singapore in may and the us in july and november . mpox outbreaks have been reported in various non-endemic countries since may of . currently, researchers are working to better understand the spread of infection, its origins, and the methods by which it spreads. the release of movement control orders and the relaxation on travel restrictions after the coronavirus disease pandemic could be one of the risk factors for a mpox outbreak. the other possibility could be the evolution in the virus’s genome, which might play a role in the emergence of mpox. in a prior investigation, modifications to the genome of the mpxv collected in may, were described. additionally, the phylogenetic analysis of the recently emerged mpox revealed that these viruses belong to the west african clade and formed a distinct cluster. the authors suggested further genomic characterization to compare the hypervariable regions of these emerged viruses to obtain more insights into their evolution, which may affect their emergence. most cases in the recent outbreak have been found among men who are gay, bisexual or men who have sex with men. the health authorities are asking msm to be aware of the symptoms, particularly if they have recently had a new sexual partner. the symptoms of mpox often last between two and four weeks. life-threatening cases are more likely to affect children whose immune systems are less developed and whose medical conditions are more precarious. in other cases, even worse consequences can be caused by underlying immunological weaknesses. people younger than or up to years old are more vulnerable to mpox today because of the global halt of smallpox vaccination campaigns following the disease’s elimination in most countries. secondary infections such as bronchopneumonia, sepsis, encephalitis, and corneal infection can all result from mpox, which can cause blindness if not treated earlier. after surveillance in non-endemic countries strengthens, the world health organization expects to see an increase in the total number of mpox cases. actions that can be taken right now include educating individuals at risk of contracting mpox and stopping the disease from spreading further. most likely to contract mpox are those who have had direct physical contact with an infected person when they are still sick. as part of the who’s efforts to ensure the safety of healthcare workers and others, including cleaners, the who provides guidelines on how to protect frontline healthcare personnel. the present review aimed to increase public awareness, offer technical support for the preventive measures, and influence readiness and reaction activities. the relevant literature was searched in the pubmed, google scholar, science direct, web of science and scopus databases by using the keywords “monkeypox”, “monkeypox virus”, “mpox” and “orthopoxviruses”. . transmission it is still unclear how mpox spread to those early cases of the continents’ residents. the centers for disease control and prevention warns doctors to be on the lookout for individuals with rash infections that could be mpox, regardless of gender or sexual orientation. there are many hypotheses that state that it is transmitted from animals to humans, but human-to-human transmission is also possible. it can be spread by touching, aerosols, infected animal bite, or scratch. in a recent research study, a rotating chamber measuring .l that was designed to fit within a class-iii biological safety cabinet was utilised to test the mpxv’s susceptibility to aerosolization. the airborne viruses were found using culture and pcr after up to h. for pcr analysis and culture analysis, the viral concentrations decreased by one log and two logs, respectively, in the first h. between and h, the viral concentrations stayed the same, which shows that the mpxv may stay infectious in aerosols for longer than h. an infected person’s respiratory droplets or skin sores or recently contaminated things might transmit the disease to another person through close contact. for respiratory droplet particles to transmit, face-to-face contact is often necessary, which raises the risk for healthcare professionals, household members, and other close contacts of active patients. the number of person-to-person infections in the longest chain of documented transmission, however, has increased from to in recent years. smallpox vaccinations have been discontinued, which may have contributed to a decrease in immunity in all areas. additionally, transmission can occur via placenta, as well as through intimate contact between mother and child after birth. mpox has a typical incubation period of to days. however, this can vary from to days. . pathophysiology of monkeypox there is a wide range of disease severity, from moderate to lethal. diarrhoea and vomiting, ocular scarring and conjunctivitis, encephalitis, and bronchopneumonia have all been documented as a complication of mpox. a common long-term complication of bacterial superinfection is permanent pitting scarring. there have been reports of miscarriage and more severe illnesses among pregnant women. for one to four days after the febrile prodrome with headache and tiredness, the patient will typically exhibit centrifugal development of deep well-circumscribed macularpapular, vesicular and pustular lesions. at each stage, lesions endure between one and three days. before or during the rash, lymphadenopathy may develop. the mpxv can majorly affect the host’s various organ systems, including the mucosal surfaces, skin, gastrointestinal tract, lymphatics, and lungs, which serve as protective barriers. airway inflammation and bronchopneumonia can cause skin exfoliation to be considerable, as well as the decreased willingness or ability to consume food or water. mpox can also lead to sepsis and other body organ dysfunction syndromes. .. bronchopneumonia bronchopneumonia is a significant consequence of mpox, as it was previously known as smallpox. however, it is not well understood. a common outcome of the pulmonary assault of nhps at different infectious doses is the development of localised necrosis of lung tissues, fulminant bronchopneumonia, and diffuse pulmonary consolidation. several studies found that intratracheal deposition of virus-containing aerosols significantly worsened respiratory distress and increased animal death. although klebsiella pneumoniae just recently emerged in one of the animals that succumbed to its illness, the animals did not often develop future bacterial infections. the manifestations of mpox in people are similar to those of smallpox, although milder. a fever, headache, muscle aches, and tiredness are among the symptoms of mpox. mpox causes lymph nodes to swell, whereas smallpox does not, and this is the fundamental distinction between the two. the lesion of mpox progress as macule formation, papule formation, vesicle formation, pustule formation, and scab formation. patients experiencing increased body temperature, headache, cough, rash, myalgia, and lymph node enlargement three weeks after contact with prairie dogs or gambia giant rats should have their symptoms evaluated by a doctor to rule out the possibility of mpox. the state or local health offices should be notified at once if specific illnesses are detected in people or animals. .. clinical manifestation comparison the symptoms of mpox are quite similar to those that were observed in the past in individuals who were suffering from smallpox, despite the fact that mpox is clinically less severe. it is brought about by the mpxv, which is classified as an orthopoxvirus and is a member of the poxviridae family of viruses. the poxviridae family and orthopoxvirus genus viruses consist of various viruses known to infect humans, including the mpxv, vaccinia virus, cowpox virus, and variola virus. in west and central africa, mpox occurs mainly in older children, adolescents, and young adults. in two large epidemiology studies of mpox outbreaks, the investigators observed a sizable number of coinfections of chickenpox and mpox. for variola, the case fatality rate majorly varied depending on the manifestation of the disease; nonetheless, aggregate case-fatality rates ranging from to % have been observed over a number of outbreaks. the severity of the condition was found to have a correlation with the amount of rash that was present and was also found to be adverse in youngsters and in women during pregnancy. furthermore, mpox can also closely resemble a genital herpes simplex infection. indeed, a patient can have both infections at the same time. the clinical pictures of smallpox and varicella share a number of similarities with mpox, which are given as a comparison in table . .. secondary co-infections due to the significant skin irritation, there is a high risk of subsequent bacterial skin infections, which have been shown to be prevalent in % of unvaccinated individuals with smallpox. before the formation of crusts, the skin of infected individuals usually remains bloated, rigid, and excruciatingly painful. the emergence of a second febrile phase, which takes place when skin lesions become pustular, has been linked to a worsening of the patient’s health status. a retrospective analysis of hospital records for a total of human cases of mpox in nigeria found that most patients suffered from fever and vesiculopustular skin eruptions that resolved on their own and did not need any treatment. the patients who were also co-infected with hiv type had more severe lesions, a longer sickness, and more vaginal ulcers and subsequent bacterial skin infections. according to the findings, hiv-negative individuals did not have all of these characteristics. the patients who survived after an illness were most likely to have permanent pitted scarring. the mortality rate of unvaccinated individuals is as high as %, and children are especially susceptible to severe sickness. in a previous study, unvaccinated patients were shown to have % more severe problems and sequelae than immunized individuals. a secondary lung infection has been found in patients who have developed respiratory discomfort or bronchopneumonia, generally at the end stage of their illness. by the second week of the disease, vomiting or diarrhoea can lead to severe dehydration. one patient had encephalitis, and another had septicaemia. eye infections can lead to corneal scarring and irreversible vision loss if left untreated. . outbreak history of monkeypox virus disease since there has been a steady increase in the number of reports of isolated outbreaks. there has been a total of separate outbreaks recorded outside of the democratic republic of the congo, of which have occurred since . in and the outbreak of mpox occurred in the drc and raised questions about whether smallpox samples should be kept for comparison with other viruses such as mpox. a total of cases of mpox, including six deaths, were reported in villages of zaire between february and august . in august when the outbreak was at its peak, the number of cases of secondary infections also increased. as the outbreak progressed, local health officials reported new cases between march and may to the who. however, another study noted that some of these might be chickenpox cases. most cases of mpox have been found in communities living in rural areas, in small villages, or in humid evergreen tropical forests, near or within the human–animal interface places. furthermore, as a result of indirect or low-level exposure to sunlight, people who live in or near forest regions may develop subclinical illnesses. after smallpox was eradicated, the first known human case may have occurred due to the subsequent exposure to infection. the disease was extremely rare and only found in the rain forests of western and central africa, where it was first discovered in the 1970s. before the outbreak in the midwest states in no cases of mpox were reported in the us. later, suspected mpox cases were reported between 16th may and 20th june of which were confirmed cases. the score for the burden of skin rashes, mortality and morbidity, hospitalization rates, and the severity of illness were utilized to describe these diseases in humans. mpox viruses are divided into two main phylogenetic groups. the severity of the disease varies between the clades reported in the us outbreak in and the west african clade. between and there were fewer than ten reported cases of the west african clade in liberia, sierra leone, nigeria, and côte d’ivoire, while the us outbreak reported cases. humans and non-human primates were affected less when infected with west african clade mpox. the outbreak in the us resulted in a large number of hospitalized patients, but no fatalities were reported. a human mpox case was reported to the who on november by the ihr national focal point of the united states of america. the patient had recently returned from a trip to nigeria. when the skin rashes appeared, the patient was in lagos, nigeria. the patient left lagos, nigeria, on november 6th for istanbul, turkey, and arrived in washington, d.c., the us, on november. while in isolation in maryland, it was confirmed that the patient had not had any previous vaccinations against smallpox. orthopoxvirus-generic and non-variola orthopoxvirus real-time -pcr assays on skin lesions were positive on november at the maryland laboratory of the laboratory response network. the pcr testing performed on the identical two lesion specimens on november 16th confirmed the diagnosis of mpox. more specifically, it was the strain of mpox from the west african lineage that has been re-emerging in nigeria since . because the patient had remained in lagos the entire time he stayed in nigeria, the infection source was unknown in this case. this case was the second time human mpox was found in a visitor to the us. non-endemic countries such as israel, singapore, and the uk and northern ireland have also reported six cases of human mpox among travellers from nigeria since . there is a big chance that tourists from endemic areas were infected due to their frequent travel around the world. endemic outbreaks were recorded in the twelve months prior to may with the highest number of infected patients in congo. between may and may cases of mpox in non-endemic countries were reported to the who. these cases of mpox were confirmed through pcr testing. on june a total of cases were reported to the who with a mortality rate of .%. the confirmed mpox cases increased to on june . as of august cases had been reported, with a mortality rate of .%. on may the who started collecting information about the outbreak from all around the world, which was reported at the state level and by health institutions. suspected cases individuals of any age who present with a sudden onset of severe rashes with fever, backpain, myalgia, headache, asthenia, and lymphadenopathy in a non-endemic country could be considered as suspected cases. the following common causes of an acute rash are not supported by the clinical picture: allergy, bacterial skin infections, primary or secondary syphilis, disseminated gonococcal infection, and any other locally relevant frequent causes of the rash. a suspected case must have an epidemiological connection, close physical contact with skin or skin lesions, or contact with contaminated objects such as bedding, clothing, or utensils in the days prior to the onset of mpox symptoms. after the start of worldwide surveillance, the who expects to see an increase in the number of cases of mpox. immediate measures include providing correct information to people who are most at risk of mpox infection, halting the spread of the disease, and safeguarding frontline workers. after recovering from the acute illness, retrospective instances discovered by active search may no longer exhibit the clinical signs of mpox, but they may still show scarring and other sequelae. in addition to current instances, retroactive cases may provide valuable epidemiological data. although retrospective instances cannot be scientifically verified, their blood may be obtained and tested for anti-orthopoxvirus antibodies to help with case categorization. samples obtained from individuals suspected of having mpox or from animals suspected of harbouring the mpxv should be handled carefully by qualified personnel working in appropriately furnished labs. when transporting samples to the testing facilities and packaging them, strict adherence to national and international rules on the transfer of infectious substances is required. to address national laboratory testing capacities, careful planning is necessary. in order to reduce risk to laboratory staff and, when required, safely conduct laboratory tests that are needed for clinical treatment, clinical labs should be informed before samples from patients with suspected or confirmed mpox are submitted. . diagnostic strategies usually, clinicians prefer a clinical diagnosis based on signs and symptoms and comparison with other diseases of the same category, such as smallpox and chickenpox. confirmatory diagnosis should be a laboratory diagnosis, and some of the diagnostic tools with their pros and cons are described below. .. polymerase chain reaction identification based on the presence of genetic material or dna in a patient’s lesion material can be used to diagnose an active case. to conduct the test, a specimen must be stored in a dark, cool setting to preserve the viral dna. contamination problems necessitate the use of extremely sensitive assays designed to target the mpxv specifically. equipment and reagents needed for these tests are expensive. a professional facility with experienced technicians is required to conduct this test. .. cell culture a chorioallantoic membrane can be used for live viral culture where this virus produces “pocks”. lesion specimens can be used for such cultures. the test takes several days to complete. the patient’s body might possess bacteria, which would make efforts at cultivation difficult. more characterization is needed for viral identification. it has to be performed in a big-capacity laboratory by skilled experts. .. immunohistological techniques this technique may be used to identify the antigens in biopsy specimens based on antigen–antibody interaction. the application of this technique may be utilised to exclude or locate other suspected organisms. it must be carried out in a large laboratory by competent healthcare professionals. .. elisa elisa is used to detect the antibodies against the mpxv in human blood, which is basically a point-of-care diagnostic tool that uses a patient’s lesion material to quickly diagnose an active case. the test may be performed at room temperature with minimal training. the mpxv is not detected by this assay. there must be endemic testing carried out. pcr is more sensitive. serological cross-reactivity amongst orthopoxviruses means that antigen and antibody detection methods cannot be used to confirm mpox. due to the lack of resources, serology and antigen detection procedures are not suggested for diagnostic use. . treatment and management studies of mpox sickness in animals have recently shed light on the disease’s biology, proposing specific aspects of supportive therapy that may be both realistic and successful at enhancing patient outcomes. in order to test the effectiveness of antivirals and vaccines, researchers were motivated by a desire to duplicate a severe smallpox-like sickness. up to this point, these studies have revealed therapeutically important information about mpox pulmonary infection and other elements of the severe illness’s clinical picture, such as signs of poor prognosis. multi-organ functions in the host can be adversely affected by mpox, which compromises the protective barriers of the skin and mucosa, causing a strong lymphatic inflammatory response and obstruction in the airways. exfoliation can be substantial in cases of a heavy rash burden, putting patients at risk of dehydration and protein loss. breathing can be severely restricted or perhaps impossible for a patient with bronchopneumonia, which is a severe inflammation of the airways. significant clinical signs of illness can also be caused by co-infections, as well as comorbidities. for patients in low-resource settings, a treatment plan must anticipate the likelihood of each of these outcomes occurring. in an ideal world, this evaluation would be based on scientifically sound criteria gleaned from extensive clinical research. in this way, resources can be used most effectively for the patient’s rehabilitation and the spread of virus is minimized. .. therapeutic measures symptom relief, complications management, and long-term sequela prevention are all goals of optimal clinical care in the treatment of mpox. fluids and food should be provided to patients to provide proper nutrition. it is important to treat any secondary bacterial infections that may arise. on the basis of results from both animal and human studies, the european medicines agency granted a license to tecovirimat, an antiviral drug originally designed for smallpox. tecovirimat inhibits the intracellular release of the virus and is preferable because of its oral administration. some other vital drugs include the following:cidofovir can be used to inhibit viral replication by inactivation of dna polymerase which can be administered intravenously, which could be nephrotoxic.brincidofovir is an orthopoxvirus nucleotide analogue dna polymerase inhibitor and a lipid conjugate of the nucleotide analogue cidofovir and is indicated for the treatment of human smallpox disease. .. vaccination according to a series of studies, more than % of mpox cases were prevented by vaccination against smallpox. the smallpox vaccine is the oldest vaccination and has undergone three generations of medical technology. in order to eradicate smallpox, first-generation vaccines were widely dispersed between and . second-generation vaccinations, which were utilized in some regions of the smallpox eradication effort, were developed in chorioallantoic membranes or cell cultures for improved purity. prior to the eradication of smallpox, third-generation vaccinations, which were based on attenuated strains of vaccinia, were developed and used. two types of smallpox vaccinations can be used for mpox. the modified vaccinia virus ankara is one of the third-generation vaccines which are based on attenuated vaccinia viruses and is a live, nonreplicating vaccine. the mva is sold under the trade name jynneos in the usa. these are significantly less virulent and have fewer adverse effects. the mva, a severely attenuated strain of the vaccinia virus, is a potential vector platform for the creation of viral-vectored vaccines due to its qualities of efficient transgene expression and safety profile. traditional smallpox vaccines based on vv have a history of causing severe side effects in both susceptible and resistant individuals. mva is a replication-deficient strain of vv that has been shown to be safe in people and immunocompromised animals. the european commission has approved the advertising of vaccines for adults, even those with impaired immune systems. acam2000 is a smallpox vaccine that is capable of replication. this type of vaccine is recommended for only healthy, immunocompetent, and non-pregnant individuals with a high risk of exposure. acam2000 needs an infectious dosage to be administered through a bifurcated, sterile needle that is inserted about times into the epidermis of the deltoid area of the arm. this vaccination has greater adverse effects than the mva vaccine. a papule will appear two to five days after immunisation and develop into a vesicle after a few more days. the vesicle achieves its maximum size in one to two weeks, after which a scab develops and sheds after two weeks. patients who receive the acam2000 vaccine often have moderate fever and lymphadenopathy within the first two weeks after vaccination. this vaccine is a single-dose vaccine and can be used for both human and animals. the t-cells are needed to stop progressive vaccinia in macaques that were injected with acam200. a study conducted by smith et al., showed that antibodies are the main form of protection against mpox provided by the current nonattenuated smallpox vaccination. .. prevention mpox can be contracted by close physical or sexual contact with an infected person. personal safety measures include staying away from those who have symptoms of the illness, using safer methods of sexual encounters, washing hands with soap and water or using an alcohol-based hand rub and observing proper respiratory habits. raising public awareness of risk factors and educating people about the precautions they may take to reduce their exposure to the virus is the main strategy for preventing mpox. the feasibility and appropriateness of vaccination to prevent and control mpox are now being studied in scientific investigations. a number of countries have or are implementing vaccination policies for people who may be at risk, including laboratory workers, fast response teams, and health workers. controlling an outbreak necessitates constant monitoring and quick detection of any new cases. close contact with an infected person is the most common way to contract the mpxv during an outbreak of human infection. there is an increased risk of infection for healthcare workers and their family members. healthcare workers caring for patients with mpxv infection or specimens from them should follow normal infection control procedures. the patient should be cared for by those who have been vaccinated against smallpox. public responsibility if a person notices a red rash with a fever or a feeling of being sick, they should contact a doctor and be tested for mpox. mpox cases should separate themselves until the scabs fall off and refrain from any kind of close physical contact. symptoms of mpox can be alleviated with supportive care at this time. the caretakers of a mpox patient should take all necessary precautions, including wearing a mask and disinfecting any surfaces and objects they have touched. .. clinical management standard contact and droplet precautions should be used by medical professionals who are treating the samples of patients infected with mpox, whether the condition is suspected or proven. all healthcare facilities, including outpatient clinics and hospitals, are required to take these precautions. hand hygiene, proper handling of contaminated medical equipment, laundry, and garbage, and cleaning and disinfection of environmental surfaces are all examples of standard measures. for low-resource settings to offer the minimum standard of supportive care for mpox patients, it is anticipated that some expenditure, including investment in laboratory diagnostics, will be required. there is insufficient data to explain whether institutional investments in supportive medical services and therapies affect mortality and morbidity sufficient to justify the costs. there is a need for research that examines how therapy intensity affects patient outcomes. stockpiling treatment plans for eye conditions, obtaining vaccinations, or supplying personal protective equipment are all examples of ways to contribute to the resources required to maintain a minimum level of care. alternatively, even if an mpox patient only has mild to moderate symptoms, they are still a transmission risk until the skin lesions heal. healthcare workers’ response prompt isolation in a private room with efficient ventilation systems, a separate restroom, and supervision is suggested in patients with suspected or proven infection. if single rooms are not accessible, the use of cohorts might be employed to ensure a minimum of one meter between patients when an infection is suspected. a gown, gloves, medical mask, and eye protection—face shield or goggles—are all examples of acceptable personal protective equipment. for patients who are in close proximity to healthcare personnel or other patients, they should be instructed to wear a medical mask, if they are able to do so. as an additional precaution, lesions might be covered with a sheet, bandage, or gown in order to reduce the risk of infection. it is imperative that all personal protective equipment be removed from the patient’s isolation area before leaving the facility. .. outbreak surveillance the term epidemic is used to define a tendency for a disease to affect a large number of individuals within a population, community, or region at a particular time. in places where there are no reported cases of such lethal diseases, a single case can lead to an epidemic later. similarly, a single mpox case can pose a significant public health threat, so clinicians should quickly notify national or local public health authorities of any suspected cases, regardless of whether they are simultaneously investigating other possible diagnosis. cases should be recorded as soon as possible, following the case definitions above or national case definitions. all suspected and confirmed cases are required to be reported to the who via the international health regulations national focal points in accordance with the ihr. in order to give the best clinical treatment, isolate affected people to stop the spread of the disease, and identify and manage contacts, it is crucial to monitor and look into mpox cases and clusters. the most commonly identified routes of transmission are used to tailor effective control and prevention methods. the monitoring of rash-like sickness should be stepped up, and skin samples should be collected for confirmation testing as soon as possible. additional public health investigations are being carried out in non-endemic countries where cases have been discovered, including extensive case detection and contact tracing, laboratory analysis, clinical treatment, and isolation under supportive care. to identify the clade of the mpxv responsible for this outbreak, scientists have used genomic sequencing when it was possible. a meeting of vaccine specialists is being held by the who. . conclusions and perspectives it is important to remember that orthopoxviruses continue to organically exploit new ecological and geographical niches, especially in this era of increased concern about bioterrorist occurrences. understanding the evolution of zoonotic orthopoxviruses, particularly the mpxv, may help us better understand how the variola virus, a pathogen with severe human pathogenicity and efficient transmission and a highly specialized host range, evolved. for decision making, it is important to understand how these unique mpxv clades affect human disease, as well as how these clades may influence future outbreak responses and diagnostic tests, as well as possible outbreak-related decisions on vaccines and therapies. mpox outbreaks in many non-endemic countries in may with no known links to endemic areas, are unusual. further studies are needed to identify the source of the infection and prevent it from spreading further. to protect the public’s health, it is critical to investigate all possible transmission channels as the cause of this outbreak is discovered.
monkeypox: a review of epidemiological modelling studies and how modelling has led to mechanistic insight abstract human monkeypox virus is a viral zoonosis that belongs to the orthopoxvirus genus of the poxviridae family, which presents with similar symptoms as those seen in human smallpox patients. mpox is an increasing concern globally, with over cases in non-endemic countries as of december . in this review, we provide a brief history and ecology of mpox, its basic virology, and the key differences in mpox viral fitness traits before and after . we summarize and critique current knowledge from epidemiological mathematical models, within-host models, and between-host transmission models using the one health approach, where we distinguish between models that focus on immunity from vaccination, geography, climatic variables, as well as animal models. we report various epidemiological parameters, such as the reproduction number, r
in a condensed format to facilitate comparison between studies. we focus on how mathematical modelling studies have led to novel mechanistic insight into mpox transmission and pathogenesis. as mpox is predicted to lead to further infection peaks in many historically non-endemic countries, mathematical modelling studies of mpox can provide rapid actionable insights into viral dynamics to guide public health measures and mitigation strategies. introduction orthopoxviruses are a genus of viruses that include variola, vaccinia, cowpox, and monkeypox viruses. smallpox, a highly pathogenic orthopoxvirus, is estimated to have claimed the lives of over million people worldwide but was successfully eradicated in through an international vaccine campaign led by the world health organization. mpox is endemic to multiple african countries, including benin, cameroon, the central african republic, the democratic republic of the congo, gabon, ivory coast, liberia, nigeria, the republic of the congo, sierra leone, and south sudan. historically, the transmission of mpox in non-endemic regions has been short-lived and contained within a specific geographic area. however, the increased prevalence of mpox in humans since the 1980s has been linked to a decrease in vaccine immunity and an increase in viral fitness traits, making it a significant emerging human threat. in the world health organization reported multiple international mpox outbreaks in non-endemic european countries, as well as the united states of america, canada, mexico, and much of south america. from may to june these outbreaks resulted in a total of cases. as of july the centers for disease control and prevention reported confirmed cases in the united states, with the total cumulative cases in non-endemic countries exceeding . by december of the total reported cumulative cases in non-endemic countries surpassed . figure is a heatmap of global cumulative case counts for the epidemic as of november . we also include a heatmap of case counts normalized by total country population, shown in figure . in june of the emergence of mpox in non-endemic countries led the who to declare the overall risk of further transmission as ‘moderate’ globally and ‘high’ in the european region. it was hypothesized that mpox mutated to find a new niche in tightly connected sexual networks. as such, mpox now presents a significant public health threat to non-endemic regions, with some countries, such as the united kingdom, responding by purchasing large amounts of smallpox vaccines for public distribution.figure .cumulative mpox cases for the epidemic from january through november . heatmap constructed from publicly available who data.
figure .cumulative mpox cases for the epidemic from january through november normalized by country total population. heatmap constructed from publicly available who data. country population data accessed from wolframalpha knowledgebase on november . mathematical modelling has proven to be a valuable tool for understanding epidemics and developing intervention strategies. modelling of in-host pathogen dynamics has been critical in advancing our understanding of many pathogens, including hiv, hcv, hbv, hsv, influenza, pneumococcus, and sars-cov-and has also aided the development of vaccine therapies. this review provides an in-depth examination of the current epidemiological understanding of mpox from a modelling perspective, and investigates how modelling studies contribute to mechanistic insight into viral fitness and transmission traits. in section we briefly cover the history and origins of mpox, and in section we provide an overview of the current basic knowledge of biology and clinical presentation of human mpox. in section we critique and review population-level modelling studies, differentiating between studies focused on endemic and non-endemic regions, those considering prior immunity from smallpox vaccines, and animal models. we summarize both pre- and post-modelling parameters, including the reproduction number, force of infection, incubation, and recovery rates, in table .table .table of values listing epidemiological parameters for mpox viral dynamics from the literatureparameterdefinitionunitsvalues epidemiological mpox parameters in humansr
0basic reproduction numbern/a2..a, .a, a, .a,.01a, .–.88a, .32a, .3a rvac
disease-free and vaccinated populationreproduction numbern/a0.β
infection ratedays−.68x10−a, .78x10−a
ps
transmission probability per sexual contactn/a0.a
i
incubation perioddays5–.a,–p
prodromal perioddays1–σ
timespan from the appearance of lesions to desquamationdays14––dh
human death ratedays−.dfrac
human infection mortality percentage%––,.<.a
βhh
human-human transmission ratedays−.ρh
human recovery ratedays−.vr
optimal vaccination ratevaccine/yr0.veff
cross-vaccine efficacy from smallpox vaccine% vloss
vaccine efficacy loss%/yr1.γ2secondary attack rate: ratio of infected household members to total household members%.γ1primary attack rate: proportion of exposed susceptible population that become ill%..animal transmission mpox infection parametersds
squirrel mpox-related death ratedays−.ρs
squirrel recovery ratedays−βss
squirrel–squirrel transmission ratedays−βsh
squirrel–human transmission ratedays−.athese values are epidemic specific; all other values are determined from pre-mpox outbreaks. history and ecology of mpox a pox-like disease was first reported in in cynomolgus monkeys and was thus named ‘monkeypox’. the disease was found to have similar structural features as orthopoxviruses: rectangular with diameter –μm. it was also observed to present similarly to variola-vaccinia viruses and exhibited a similar serological relationship. further studies revealed that mpox led to the formation of intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusions and could pass serially in rabbit skin. throughout the 1960s and 1970s, who continued to monitor both mpox and smallpox in non-human primates to determine if an animal reservoir existed. in the 1960s, four mpox outbreaks were recorded in animals with no recorded infections in humans. in an mpox outbreak occurred in a zoo and was believed to have been caused by two imported anteaters. the zoo outbreak had a particularly high mortality rate. despite containment procedures, mpox spread to nearby enclosures, resulting in animal infections and a total of deaths, including out of infected orangutans. transmission between humans the first human mpox case was reported in in a -month-old baby in the democratic republic of congo. a study of mpox cases in west and central africa from –estimated only % of cases to spread from human-to-human contact, where human mpox cases were primarily suspected to occur from contact with monkeys and squirrels. the human-to-human transmission was noted to ‘stop spontaneously’, with attack rates suspected to be % amongst smallpox-unvaccinated households and .% amongst vaccinated. these were noted to be comparably less than smallpox attack rates amongst the unvaccinated which ranged from % to %. a study conducted in zaire between and of patients with human mpox found attack rates for household contacts of .% amongst unvaccinated and .% amongst vaccinated. in this study, % of cases were found amongst vaccinated individuals leading to the hypothesis that the immunity gained from smallpox vaccination was waning, and further raised a concern that the virus may later become endemic. the low attack rates of mpox, and the unchanging secondary attack rates throughout the 1970s through early 1980s amongst the unvaccinated, supported the decision from the global commission to cease the smallpox vaccination programme in central african countries where mpox was now considered endemic. multiple self-contained mpox outbreaks were documented through the early 2000s. of note, a major outbreak in nigeria began in september of and ultimately led to suspected cases. human mpox infections in the nigeria outbreak were predominantly male, and the outbreak was ultimately contained. the mpox outbreak in the usa appeared to be particularly severe in children, where a fifth of paediatric patients developed serious complications resulting in intensive medical intervention, with half of paediatric patients admitted to the icu. for a detailed review of all pre-human mpox outbreaks, we refer to ref.. the international emergence of human–human transmission of mpox in multiple non-endemic countries constitutes a significant shift in viral prevalence. pathogenesis, clinical presentation, and longitudinal within-host dynamics of mpox the incubation period of human mpox can range from to days, with a typical incubation period of –days, followed by a prodromal period of –days. clinical characteristics of mpox are similar to those of smallpox: enlarged lymph nodes and a rash period that lasts –days. distinct from smallpox, mpox often presents with cervical or inguinal lymphadenopathy, suggesting that the immune response to mpox differs from that of smallpox. a detailed list of clinical characteristics, including changes in mpox epidemiology as a function of time, is described in the article by wilson et al.. a study on non-human primates longitudinally tracked viral shedding and cytokines from both intrabronchial exposure and intravenous inoculation of mpox. through tracking mpox viral features over a -day window, they found that the time to mean day of lesion exposure increases as a function of decreasing mpox dosage. they further found peak viral load to vary significantly between nasal and oral swabs. recent clinical human studies in france and spain have longitudinally tracked cohorts of people over and days. these studies compare mpox viral load between hiv+ and hiv- individuals and find mpox cycle threshold values to decrease significantly for both categories of individuals, and further conclude transmission of mpox to primarily occur through direct body contact rather than through a respiratory route or bodily fluids. serological features that inform us about immune responses can also be used by within-host modelling studies to reveal mechanistic insight into viral traits as well as vaccine dynamics. interferon-gamma is a cytokine known to play a pivotal role in host defence against pathogens, and is often used to model within-host inflammatory responses and infer cellular-mediated immunity. immunity from smallpox vaccination has been shown to elicit ifng, cytotoxic t cell, and neutralizing protein responses in humans that can last over years. the inflammatory cytokine ifng has been shown to play an important role in protection against mpox in mice, whereby inactivation of the ifng receptor led to increased sensitivity to mpox. earl et al. also report viral titres as a function of time in various major organs, where lungs were found to contain the highest pfu/g for all time points. they also track six cytokines, including ifng and il6, as a function of time after injection and find a strong ifng response in balb/c mice but not in other types of mice. interestingly, orthopoxvirus have been shown to suppress recognition of viruses by innate cells through suppressing ifn production. further, mpox has been found to suppress t-cell activation by triggering a state of t-cell non-responsiveness; thus, a within-host model of mpox should take into account cd4 and cd8 suppression dynamics. these longitudinal data serve as a useful starting point for a within-host modelling study of mpox and can be utilized to guide model predictive power and determine practical identifiability in estimated parameters. lum et al. provide an in-depth review of the clinical immune features of mpox. mpox cross-protective immunity from the smallpox vaccine is known to occur. for example, prairie dogs vaccinated with the smallpox vaccine and then challenged with mpox were found to mount a significant humoral response. further, vaccinated humans were found to mount strong cellular and humoral responses as shown in longitudinal data over a -day study period. however, longer-term studies find efficacy wanes at an approximate rate of .%/yr. we refer to lum et al. for an in-depth review of mpox clinical immune features. in the next sections, we review epidemiological modelling efforts of population spread of mpox, distinguishing between human–human, animal–animal, animal–human, and human–animal scenarios. we further cover modelling studies incorporating climate variables, therapeutic strategies, contact tracing, and isolation measures. machine learning is emerging as a technology with demonstrated capability for early detection of mpox. however, we do not provide a detailed review of the application of machine learning to mpox; such work can be found in refs.. population-level epidemiological models sir/seir with no immunity compartmental modelling techniques have been used extensively to describe the population spread of infectious diseases. among infectious disease models, the most fundamental and classic model is the susceptible-infected-recovered compartmental model developed by kermack and mckendrick. in the sir model, the total population is divided into three subgroups based on the disease status: susceptible, infected, and recovered. s represents the susceptible population that has not yet but may be infected by the disease, i represents the infected population that can transmit the disease, and r represents the population recovered from the infected disease. two parameters are used in the classic sir model: the effective contact rate and the recovery rate. β affects the transition from s → i, and γ affects the transition from i → r, and the total population, n, is conserved through time n = s + i + r. an example schematic of the sir model is shown in figure 4a. the epidemiological model framework for mpox has been established over the past few decades, and many models capturing human–human, and animal–human interactions have been explored. jezek et al. constructed a stochastic model using the monte carlo method to simulate the chain of human-to-human transmission of mpox. the model has been validated and applied to understand the transmission potential of mpox in unvaccinated populations. bhunu and mushayabasa presented a basic sir compartmental model to examine the transmission dynamics of mpox between humans and non-humans, and betti et al. present a sir model with additional pair-formation dynamics to account for transmission via prolonged close contact between individuals. we summarize parameters determined by mpox epidemiological modelling studies in table . for the non-human population, mpox parameters are found to be: yr−for the rate of recruitment for susceptibles, a natural death rate of .yr−the death rate due to mpox is given as .yr−and the rate of immunity is given as .yr−. pre-for the human population, mpox parameters were found to be: .yr−for recruitment rate of susceptibles, a natural death rate of .yr−the death rate due to mpox of .–.yr−and permanent immunity rate of .–.yr−. the animal-only endemic equilibrium is globally asymptotically stable when r
0n > and r
0h < . the endemic equilibrium, where mpox infections exist in both the human and non-human populations, was shown to be locally asymptotically stable when r
0h > but close to . models with vaccination the sir model often oversimplifies complex disease transmission dynamics. for example, the sir model does not consider the incubation duration, defined as the span of time between when an individual is exposed to a disease and when that individual becomes infected. we refer to tolles and luong who highlight limitations of the traditional sir model, including that it results in often over-simplified assumptions about the population dynamics. thus, most epidemiological work involves sir-inspired models with more mathematical complexity to account for complex population dynamics. the susceptible-exposed-infected-recovered model has been widely used to study infectious disease dynamics. in the seir model, an exposed compartment is added to the fundamental sir model, representing individuals who are exposed but have not yet been contagious, such that they experience an incubation period. mitigation strategies such as vaccination can also be considered. for example, usman et al. developed an sveir model that accounts for a varied incubation period and individual vaccination status. they found that adequate vaccination and treatment policies could dramatically reduce the spread of mpox among humans. based on mpox parameters prior to year they conclude that an increase in vaccination control parameters leads to a decrease in the basic reproduction number. emeka et al. also incorporate a vaccine compartment in a population of mpox-susceptible individuals and generally find that mpox outbreaks do not occur in populations of vaccinated individuals. building on the work of usman and adamu, bankuru et al. introduced a simplified sir model of the mpox dynamics, providing closed-form formulas for equilibrium states of this disease dynamics, allowing for direct calculations of the semi-endemic equilibrium. they showed there exists a semi-endemic equilibrium in which there is no infection in the squirrel population, while the disease still persists in the human population. they found that the optimal vaccination rate amongst humans is about .vaccine/year, meaning that individuals should be advised to vaccinate approximately once every years. they also found the optimal vaccination rate is about times more sensitive to parameters related to animal hosts than to a corresponding parameter related to humans, thus concluding that more precise information about reservoir hosts is needed.figure .costs versus vaccination rate with a high rate of the effective human-to-human transmission. fully endemic equilibrium and semi-endemic equilibrium. reprinted by permission from peerj from ref.. copyright . as countries such as the uk are purchasing large quantities of vaccines for public dissemination, given that vaccine efficacy has been found to drop at a rate of .% per year, mathematical modelling studies such as that done by bankuru et al. can be used to inform vaccination rates, as well as which proportion of the population needs to be vaccinated to achieve herd immunity. another important factor explored by bankuru et al. is the cost of vaccination. where cost is defined in a game-theoretic sense, the cost of not vaccinating is given by the product of the cost of infection with the probability of becoming infected. in figure we include plots of cost as a function of vaccination rate when the human–human transmission rate is high, where bankuru et al. find that the overall cost of vaccinating is much lower compared to not-vaccinating for most epidemic scenarios. a combination of historical data and epidemiological modelling was used to estimate the basic reproduction number, r
of mpox in the democratic republic of the congo during –to be between .and .. mpox r
was thus significantly less than smallpox which had an estimated range of r
of .–.. due to the lasting immunity from the smallpox vaccine, mpox was deemed not self-sustainable in human populations in the drc from –. however, by the year estimates show that the immunity from smallpox vaccination against mpox had fallen to % in non-endemic countries. hence, mpox has long been hypothesized to have increasing potential to emerge as an epidemic in humans in historically non-endemic countries. epidemiological modelling studies on the global outbreak population-level human-to-human models of mpox throughout the epidemic have been largely based on sir and seir frameworks. these modelling studies consider public health mitigation strategies, contact tracing, and sexual mixing models. for reference, the current scenario of global cumulative mpox cases by country is shown in figure and with cases normalized by country population shown in figure . we further include the current global trend as a function of time for as shown in figure 4b. we next go through current modelling literature on the epidemic, and how modelling is bringing further mechanistic insight into mpox dynamics.figure . schematic of basic sir model with standard incidence, similar as used to model mpox dynamics for the pandemic. global reported mpox cases as a function of weeks for the year . data accessed from publicly available who data. the increase in cases from the mpox global outbreak has been shown to be strongly associated with close intimate sexual contact. for the epidemic, mpox spread has been predominantly transmitted between men who have sex with men, with one study of diagnosed infections finding % of infected persons to be gay or bisexual males. data-driven individual-level and population-level modelling studies can be used to outline the importance of public health policies and various mitigation strategies. for example, the model presented by betti et al. presents a novel framework that includes pair formation to describe mpox transmission. they show their pair-formation model captures population trends in data with an estimated r
of .and they further predict the occurrence of future waves of infection. similarly, bragazzi et al. develop a seiqr model that includes the sexual behaviour of high-risk individuals and find that r
amongst the high-risk population to be ∼.whereas amongst the low-risk population to be as low as .. modelling has also been used to disentangle the many factors leading the decline of mpox in the outbreak. for example, through examining changes in sexual behavioural activity versus vaccination campaigns, studies have found the initial downturn in cases during the epidemic was largely due to changes in sexual behaviour. network models have also demonstrated utility towards understanding mpox transmission dynamics. bisanzio et al. utilize a recently developed individual-based modelling framework whereby they simulate the spread of mpox in a network of million susceptible individuals distributed across n cells to represent a population density characteristic of a typical european country of land mass similar to france or spain. with spread amongst the population driven by an seir model, they predict mpox outbreaks lasting –weeks where mitigation strategies such as contact tracing with isolation followed by vaccination could reduce the median duration of a mpox outbreak by as much as %. another network model by van dijck et al. explores the ramifications of undiagnosed mpox cases and predict that if % of mpox contacts abstain from sexual activity, this could result in a % reduction in cases. another contact tracing study on the transmission dynamics in the uk predicted the epidemic peak to occur in early july of and further found that a significant number of cases were caused by pre-symptomatic transmission and determined a mean incubation period of .days. compartmental and game-theoretic modelling, as well as modelling infection curves with comparably simple logistic functions, has also proven to be beneficial towards revealing mpox population dynamics and the consequences of various mitigation strategies. mingione et al. apply the generalized logistic curve to country-wide data from the top non-endemic countries experiencing mpox outbreaks and find agreement with the literature that containment of the outbreak is feasible over the short term if mitigation strategies are employed. building on previous work similar to ref., augsburger et al. employ an sveir-based model to the global pandemic and further explore vaccination in a game-theoretic framework where individuals consider cost and benefits to vaccination. they find without vaccination mpox prevalence is predicted to be approximately .cases per individuals, while with optimal voluntary vaccination, prevalence is predicted to be approximately .cases per individuals. thus, vaccination is predicted to be a strong mitigative factor in reducing mpox prevalence and minimizing the chances of mpox becoming endemic is historically non-endemic countries. savinkina et al. employ an seir-based model, utilizing previously published assumptions on low-risk and high-risk population-level reproduction numbers, and simulate the spread of mpox on college campuses. in their hypothetical analysis, they find the absence of mitigation leads to an % chance of sustained transmission. the population modelling studies of the global outbreak all agree, based on current data on mpox trends, that the outbreaks occurring in non-endemic countries are generally under control and on a declining trend. this is of course supported by the current global trend in cases; a histogram of global case counts up to november is shown in figure 4b. a summary of mpox mathematical modelling population parameters is provided in table . epidemiological modelling studies are important for policy decision-makers when deciding which mitigation strategy or control measures to employ. predictive modelling for future mpox peaks will be important in aiding policy decision-makers. for example, modelling techniques on mpox have been developed to estimate the true number of unreported cases, and further, have shown promise to accurately predict infection cycles. modelling studies clearly highlight the important of mitigation strategies. for example, vaccination campaigns should be organized to reduce population infectivity and further reduce the probability of allowing a more virulent and transmissive mpox strain to emerge. yuan et al. consider an seir model whereby the population is divided into high and low risk and focus their study on mass gathering scenarios. they find that a broad vaccination campaign is less effective in curbing the spread of mpox than compared to contact tracing, isolation, and vaccination of close contacts. they further posit that the ring vaccination strategy may be inadequate in preventing an outbreak from occurring; however, it does still result in fewer case counts. they follow up their work with a study to consider the mpox threat to the low-risk population if viral transmissibility increases. they conclude that isolation, contact tracing, and quarantine are key mitigation strategies to prevent infection in the event of increased viral transmission into low-risk populations. predictive modelling for future mpox peaks can be an important factor in aiding policy decision-makers. for example, based on canadian mpox trends, there are predicted to be further peaks occurring on an approximately annual basis. as noted, the -mpox strain is predominantly spreading through close intimate contacts. however, orthopoxviruses, such as smallpox, are known to transmit via a respiratory route. currently, a respiratory transmission mode is not found to play a major role in the outbreak. thus, modelling studies, such as bottleneck studies, that aim to predict mutation lineages and probabilities of mutant transmission, can play an important role in predicting the potential severity of future mpox mutants. the concern that mpox could mutate to find a respiratory transmission route is warranted. the cost and benefit of mitigation strategies, including the details of how they can be disseminated to the public, can be readily explored through modelling studies to aid public health campaigns should the virus emerge with a more infectious mutant. immunity decline hypothesis the recent emergence and outbreaks of mpox are still under investigation. one hypothesis for the increase in cases relates to the decline in population cross-immunity provided by the smallpox vaccine. in the who declared the eradication of smallpox. soon afterwards, routine smallpox immunization ended worldwide. smallpox vaccine has proven to induce humoral and cell-mediated responses against orthopoxviruses, creating a heterotypic immunity composed of a wide array of antigen receptors and estimated to have an efficacy of % in preventing mpox infection in humans. thus, it has been suggested that younger generations not vaccinated against smallpox are vulnerable to mpox infection. this section will discuss the current evidence from mathematical models testing the declining immunity from vaccination in increasing susceptibility to mpox. data from the democratic republic of the congo revealed that individuals born before the official vaccination cessation had a .-fold lower risk of mpox infection than unvaccinated persons. nguyen et al. modelled the declining immunity in nigeria, accounting for individual-level declining immunity at a rate of .% per year, as well as country-wide declining immunity using weighted regional estimates of smallpox vaccination coverage. they found the increase in unvaccinated and immunologically naive population, and together with the decline from % to .% in efficacy from cross-immunity protection provided by smallpox vaccination, and that the overall population immunity was estimated to be only .% as of . shown in figure 5a, we include an example of their findings.figure . visualization of the relationship between smallpox vaccination and cross-immunity conferred to mpox virus rates at a population and individual level in nigeria from to . reprinted by permission from centers for disease control and prevention from ref.. copyright . predicted change of the reproduction number r for mpx as a function of immunity in a population to orthopoxvirus species. blue circles show a scenario where the vaccination percentage is high, most of the population presents high-level cross-immunity against orthopoxvirus species, and the mpox r value is low. yellow circles show the scenario where vaccination and cross-immunity rates are low, and mpox r-value increases to >.. reprinted by permission from the world health organization from ref.. copyright . the declining immunity from vaccination to smallpox represents an epidemiological threat by increasing the mpox reproduction number. the basic reproduction number, r0, of any infectious disease is dynamic and depends on many variables, including characteristics of the pathogen characteristics and the host. grant et al. modelled this relationship with data from the drc. they determine an mpox reproduction number, r.
r is given by r = r
where ϵ represents the vaccine efficacy, and p the vaccination coverage. given a current immunity estimate, they determine r could be higher than .. we include a plot of their results for r as a function immunity in figure 5b. the increase in attack rate over time may be evidence for the immunity decline hypothesis as well. mpox household attack rates amongst the unvaccinated and vaccinated were reported as % and .%, respectively, in . the outbreak in the drc, which represented a -fold increase in annual infections, was found to have a household attack rate of %, where many people who contracted mpox were previous smallpox vaccine recipients. the loss of immunity hypothesis is not mutually exclusive from other re-emergence theories, such as the increased exposure to wildlife, reservoir expansion, globalization, and mutations to mpox fitness traits. these factors represent critical barriers to consider for mpox spillover opportunity. an increase in the mpox immune-naive population and the risk of exposure create a niche for continued mpox animal-to-human and human-to-human transmission, longer chains of infection, and thus an opportunity for mutation in mpox viral transmission traits. pre-human-to-human transmission chains have been relatively short-lived, and stochastic models performed in the 1980s based on historical data found mpox to have a low probability to be established in human populations. however, more recent models have shown that sustained human-to-human transmissions could favour pathogen evolution, creating a potential existence of semi-endemic or fully endemic equilibrium. a clustered epidemiological differential model developed by ali et al. considered human behavioural dynamics such as vaccination and drug hesitancy, cooperation, and mobility rate and showed how opination dynamics have a tremendous impact on fatality rates. furthermore, models on voluntary vaccination have shown the potential control of mpox outbreaks in a semi-endemic equilibrium but not in a fully endemic one. in an endemic equilibrium scenario, deterministic compartmental models showed that isolation of infected individuals, in combination with adequate treatment and vaccination, plays an essential role in the control and eradication of mpox. modelling efforts show vaccination remains a high-potential primary mpox mitigation strategy and should continue to be prioritized in endemic regions. however, to achieve effective mpox management, a combination of countermeasures needs to be considered. novel mpox-specific vaccines, treatments, and prophylaxis public health measures are all under development to mitigate mpox spread. effect of reservoirs and wildlife control measures a report by the who in concluded that mpox transmission between monkeys is ‘infrequent’ and that most likely another animal reservoir existed. a definitive mpox virus reservoir host is still unknown and under study. currently, giant-pouched rats, rope squirrels, and african dormice are posited as the most likely candidates. throughout the 1980s, the animal–animal spread was found with particular prevalence in squirrels of the funisciurus anerythrus species, where it was shown they sustain mpox viral transmission in areas near human settlements. squirrel mpox-related death rates and recovery rates were later found to be approximately .and days, respectively. during the global mpox outbreak, it was discovered that human-to-dog transmission is possible, thus raising concerns about further dog-to-dog and dog-to-human transmission. culling, the reduction in wild animal populations through selective slaughter, has been employed as a method for wildlife reservoir management and to mitigate the potential of further animal-to-human transmission. for example, culling has been employed recently during the sars-cov-pandemic to mitigate further animal-to-animal transmission amongst farmed minks. culling to prevent further mpox spread has been explored through transmission modelling approaches, where it has been found to be ineffective and can lead to the counter-productive outcome of increasing mpox infection. this is because culling results in the sudden removal of mature animals with immunity replaced with juvenile, more susceptible animals, thus increasing the probability of outbreaks. climatic variables influencing mpox transmission: a one health approach the one health approach aims to recognize the strong linkage between the health of humans, animals, plants, and the environment, to develop integrated and sustainable solutions. given the interconnected coexistence between humans, animals, and the environment, mpox emergence in the context of climate change represents a one health challenge. from a one health perspective, we present current evidence on mathematical modelling connecting climate change impacts on the environment, animals, and humans, to mpox dynamics. climate change has altered human–environment systems. the emergence and re-emergence of many infectious diseases are projected to increase due to the negative impact of climate change. interactions between the three factors embodied in the epidemiological triangle: the virus, the human, and the reservoir, have been found to contribute to mpox emergence and expansion. in addition to the decrease in herd immunity caused by the cessation of smallpox vaccination, climatic variables and human behaviour have created an ideal niche for mpox transmission. in this section, we discuss the current model-based evidence for mpox transmission, emphasizing the influence of climate factors. the impact on human health from climate change is an emerging topic. there is a consensus on increased adverse climate-related health outcomes such as food insecurity, heath-related mortality and morbidity, mental health damage, or injuries. impacts on health can include the impairment of the immune system due to direct or indirect effects of climate change. there has been significant scientific interest in mpox spread within endemic african countries with particular attention to mpox biogeographic barriers. environmental conditions can define the spread and durability of pathogens outside their hosts. survival models have shown that orthopoxviruses are high-virulence high-survival pathogens, which implies high durability outside their host. seasonal patterns of mpox outbreaks have been observed during the fall season and linked to deforestation and flooding. historical evidence suggests that dense and humid lowland tropical forests ecotones are the most favourable ecosystem for zoonotic transmission of mpox. prior to the outbreak, mathematical models concluded that continued mpox human–human population spread required continued zoonotic reservoir exposure to maintain chains of transmission. therefore, much attention has been paid to mpox reservoirs; however, there is no clear consensus on the natural or definitive reservoir as of the time of writing. it is known that environmental conditions can affect the transmission of mpox between animals. having an unknown primary reservoir for mpox limits a model’s accuracy in the prediction of the impact of climate variables on the animal–animal and animal–human dynamics. multivariate analyses of historical data have demonstrated that mpox can co-occur on several species in an unanticipated manner. additionally, ecological niche modelling techniques have been used to model the climate and spatial distribution of mpox, where these modelling studies emphasized the critical role of ecosystem variation on reservoir distribution.figure . two-dimensional representation of ecological niche models developed for two mpox reservoir species cricetomys gambianus and cricetomys emini across tropical sub-saharan africa. reprinted by permission from oxford university press from ref.. copyright . observed and predicted human mpox occurrence under present and future climate conditions with reservoir species as predictor variables in central and western africa. the average projected change in occurrence probability for eight climate change scenarios for and . reprinted and modified by permission from plos one from ref.. copyright . mpox prevalence detected in dried museum specimens of potential mpox reservoir species, with an underlying layer representing tree cover, with darker greens corresponding to high cover percentages. reprinted by permission from the royal society publishing from ref.. copyright . understanding mpox spatial ecology is essential to predict future outbreaks under climate change conditions. spatial and probabilistic models have been used to study mpox occurrence, particularly in africa. including climatic variables has been demonstrated to be critical in the spatial analysis of mpox at a local scale and regional scale. climatic variables such as temperature and precipitation seasonality are reservoir species predictors, meaning that a small change in those variables could also change the reservoir dynamics and thus animal–human transmission probability. furthermore, climatic and ecosystem variables can increase habitat suitability for potential mpox reservoirs and, by extension, more frequent wildlife–human contact. other extreme weather events, such as droughts, can force carrying mpox species to move closer to human settlements. future research predicting shifts in reservoir species should also focus on how this dynamic is affected by environmental changes. we propose that models should include the viral dynamic considerations of interrupting or increasing wildlife–human interaction frequency under climate change scenarios. wastewater-based epidemiology to monitor mpox levels wastewater-based epidemiology is a population-level biomarker surveillance method to analyse wastewater for either chemicals or pathogens. wbe has been shown to be able to estimate mpox population trends through time; however, key gaps in our understanding of the application of wbe to mpox have been highlighted, namely, the current lack of a % inclusive wbe methodology and limits cross-reactivity with non-targeted species. towards applying wbe to mpox, chen and bibby developed a monte carlo approach to estimate the probability of detecting mpox dna in wastewater. they determine that united states wastewater treatment plants may be able to detect infections out of people based on previously reported daily shedding rates. towards a within-host model for mpox the goal of within-host modelling is to represent the complex physiological processes of a disease, or therapeutic, within the body with mathematical models. within-host mathematical models are developed under biological principles and then fit longitudinal serological data to estimate various aspects of physiological dynamical outcomes. modelling of in-host pathogen dynamics has proven critical towards furthering our understanding of hiv, hcv, hbv, hsv, influenza, and sars-cov-as well as aiding the development of vaccine therapies. following the development and fitting of a model to serological data, structural and practical identifiability methods are then employed to assess model reproducibility and reliability. within-host models have been used extensively to estimate properties of disease dynamics, thus contributing to our understanding of the disease progression at the within-host scale. at the time of writing, there is a noticeable lack of within-host mechanistic modelling studies of mpox, with few within-host studies for any orthopoxvirus. the work of ogunjimi et al., who model the cd4 trajectories of human chickenpox, to the best of our knowledge, is the only published orthopoxvirus within-host modelling work. the mpox longitudinal clinical studies outlined in section provides an overview of current knowledge of mpox serological parameters required to fit to a typical within-host model and should serve as a strong starting point for such a study. future directions and concluding thoughts mathematical modelling provides a cost-effective and non-invasive methodology for gaining actionable insights into viral dynamics and therapeutic responses at the population and within-host levels. at the within-host level, mathematical modelling utilizes serology-based diagnostics to understand disease transmission dynamics, including viral reproduction numbers, viral load clearance, and cell recovery, to understand the timescales of disease transmission. however, such studies on mpox are currently limited. at the population level, mathematical modelling leverages population metrics, such as contact tracing data, cumulative case counts, and wastewater surveillance, to predict outbreak characteristics such as recovery rates, transmission, virulence, and reproduction numbers. although the current mpox epidemic case counts are declining, models predict future waves to occur annually. therefore, modelling efforts can assist in the allocation of public health resources to mitigate the future spread of infection, such as identifying when and whom to target in vaccine or education campaigns. the burden of human infectious disease remains high in many countries, with recent outbreaks of emerging and re-emerging pathogens referred to as the ‘new era of infectious disease’. climate change is causing significant changes in natural ecosystems worldwide. more than half of infectious diseases affecting human populations having been aggravated by climate hazards through pathways such as bringing pathogens closer to people or causing favourable changes to viral fitness traits. mathematical models of infectious diseases that consider climatic variables, such as accomplished for diseases such as influenza virus, west nile virus, sars-cov2, and malaria, have demonstrated utility for policymakers in planning public health prevention and responses strategies. this review revealed that the practice of including climatic variables in the mathematical modelling of mpox still needs further exploration. for example, current modelling evidence suggests that climate variables can significantly impact mpox transmission and pathogenesis by affecting the reservoir–human contact environment. therefore, it is crucial to consider climatic variables at the local, regional, and global scales in future mpox mathematical modelling studies to better understand its complex dynamics with potential reservoirs and potential impacts on human populations. the emergence of mpox as a global threat in has resulted in over cases in non-endemic countries as of november . as mpox has gained global attention, it is becoming increasingly important to conduct higher resolution studies that report regular case counts and longitudinal serological measures, such as iggs, and cd4/cd8 responses, which can be utilized in mathematical modelling approaches to gain deeper insight into viral dynamics and predictive power. an interdisciplinary work between clinicians and mathematicians can better inform timescales of clinical data acquisition to gain the optimal information on disease dynamics from limited data sets. to date, no within-host modelling studies of mpox have been carried out to our knowledge. efforts to quantify an immunological correlation of protection in humans against mpox have been reported. however, a robust correlate of protection against the strain still needs to be discovered. mathematical approaches can leverage serological studies to correlate humoral and cellular longitudinal responses with case severity or vaccine efficacy, similar to what has been done for sars-cov-. it is also important to understand differences in within-host dynamics amongst cohorts containing various comorbidities, notably high-risk individuals co-infected with syphilis or hiv. longitudinal studies working to understand the risks of vaccination in these vulnerable populations need to be included. as has become evident throughout the sars-cov-pandemic, many long-term consequences of sars-cov-can present as neurological or psychiatric, cardiovascular, and various immunological dysfunctions. longitudinal studies to identify and understand the extent of these potential long-term consequences for moderate and severe mpox cases will become increasingly important. mathematical modelling can help predict the proportion of individuals expected to suffer from long-term consequences of mpox infection and inform public health policy decisions.
molecular epidemiology, transmission and clinical features of ‐mpox outbreak: a systematic review abstract background and aims the ‐mpox outbreak has spread worldwide in a short time. integrated knowledge of the epidemiology, clinical characteristics, and transmission of mpox are limited. this systematic review of peer‐reviewed articles and gray literature was conducted to shed light on the epidemiology, clinical features, and transmission of ‐mpox outbreak. methods we identified peer‐reviewed manuscripts for data analysis. the standards of the preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta‐analysis statement and cochrane collaboration were followed for conducting the study. results the case number of mpox has increased about times worldwide. about % of the cases in outbreak was from non‐endemic regions. men were mostly infected with homosexual and bisexual behavior. the ages of the infected people ranged between and years. the presence of hiv and sexually transmitted infections among %–% of cases were reported. human‐to‐human transmission via direct contact and different body fluids were involved in the majority of the cases. lesions in genitals, perianal, and anogenital areas were more prevalent. unusually, pharyngitis and proctitis were more common during outbreak than pre‐outbreaks. brincidofovir is approved for the treatment of smallpox by fda. two vaccines, including jynneostm and acam2000®, are approved and used for pre‐ and post‐prophylaxis in cases. about % of the cases in non‐endemic regions were associated with isolates of iib clade with a divergence of .–.. isolates from b.lineage were the most predominant followed by b..and b... conclusion this study will add integrated knowledge of the epidemiology, clinical features, and transmission of mpox. introduction the mpox outbreak has transmitted across countries with case number surpassing on march .
no historical records of mpox have been reported from the majority of the localities before the outbreak.
nearly % cases and fatalities are reported from these non‐endemic regions.
the highest number of cases have been recorded in the united states with deaths.
historically, monkeypox virus was isolated in from outbreaks in cynomolgus monkeys with smallpox‐like symptoms in copenhagen.
during 1970s, several outbreaks were reported from monkeys in the united states and the netherlands. the first symptomatic case of human mpox was documented in during smallpox surveillance in democratic republic of congo from a ‐month‐old child followed by another six cases in young children during –in west africa.
before the ongoing outbreak, mpox was considered a rare zoonotic disease.
monkeypox virus is a double‐stranded dna virus belonging to the family poxviridae, subfamily chordopoxvirinae, and genus orthopoxvirus.
the genus includes other important pathogens of humans and animals, including mpox, cowpox, camelpox, vaccinia, and the smallpox. symptomatic infection of monkeypox virus results in smallpox‐like symptoms in patients. further, monkeypox and smallpox viruses are highly similar both in genetic and antigenic properties.
the genome of monkeypox virus is about kb in size, linear, and contains hairpin ends with inverted terminal repeats. nearly proteins are encoded by mpox virus. housekeeping genes are encoded from the central conserved regions. antigenic proteins are encoded by the terminal regions of the genome and vary between poxviruses.
the animal reservoirs of zoonotic monkeypox virus are still unknown. further, the intermediate hosts of monkeypox virus are also unknown.
apes and monkeys are the most likely intermediate hosts and several rodent species, including tree squirrels, rope squirrels, gambian pouched rats, and dormice, are the most probable animal reservoir of monkeypox virus.
the natural history of monkeypox virus is yet to be discovered. based on the findings of previous sporadic and recent outbreaks, the transmission route of monkeypox virus can be characterized.
the recent findings support the presence of monkeypox virus in semen and man to man sexual transmission.
transmission of monkeypox virus has been reported via saliva, respiratory droplets, aerosols, and close contact, direct contact with lesions, contaminated fomite, and possibly air.
parenteral transmission and fetal deaths of mpox have been reported.
patients with monkeypox virus infection develop characteristic symptoms.
the most common symptoms include fever, multiple popular lesions, vesiculopustular lesions, and ulcerative lesions on the body and face and lymphadenopathy.
case fatality rate may vary between % and % depending on the clade of monkeypox virus infection.
severe illnesses and other complications like encephalitis, pneumonitis, and secondary infections are higher in children, elderly, and hiv‐infected patients.
the discontinuation of routine vaccination of smallpox since and asymptomatic circulation of monkeypox virus in humans may have contributed significantly to changes of biological properties of the virus.
further, changes in human behaviors and movement have probably contributed to the outbreaks. studies on the epidemiology, clinical characteristics, and transmission route are scarce. only few review studies are available with limited knowledge of the previous sporadic outbreaks.
recently, as case numbers are increasing, studies focusing on clinical features and transmission are getting highlighted to understand the baseline of the outbreaks. this study was conducted to create integrated insights about the epidemiology, route of transmission in the human body and environment along with clinical data of monkeypox virus. methods definitions the epidemiology of mpox is defined as the distribution and determinants of outbreaks in different populations and strategies taken to minimize the health effect in different population. the clinical feature was defined, including both the signs and symptoms during and after the mpox infection. transmission of monkeypox virus was defined as the transfer of the virus from human to human, reservoirs to human, and carrier to human. this study included epidemiological, clinical, and virological studies. the pcr‐positive laboratory‐confirmed test was defined as the positive mpox case. the standards of the preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta‐analysis statement and cochrane collaboration were followed for conducting the study.
the study is submitted for registration in the prospero. study design the study was conducted by the following different steps, including identification of precise objectives and search strategies, appropriate research articles, inclusion of manuscripts, collection of data, analysis, and summarization of the findings. this study included previous findings from epidemiological studies, case studies, outbreak investigation, surveillance work, and online databases. no strict parameters for the quality assessment of these studies are available. as a result, this study relied on the quality report of the selected articles by the authors. search strategy and selection criteria we performed searches for articles in medline, embase, web of science, scopus, the internet library sub‐saharan africa, african journals online, the new england journal of medicine and the lancet with no restriction on language and place. all published articles and scientific writings till march were included in this study. the notable search term included monkeypox, monkeypox virus, monkey pox, mpxv, epidemiology of mpox, epidemiology of monkeypox, clinical features of monkeypox, sign and symptoms of monkeypox, clinical characteristics of mpox, cases of monkeypox, transmission of mpox, transmission of monkeypox, “variole simienne,” and “variole du singe” and combination of these terms. separate searches were made for each term in every website and database. additionally, we conducted search on the gray literature and google scholar. these sources included databases from cdc, ecdc, who, epicentre, promed, cdc of nigeria, cdc of africa, and african field epidemiology network. we searched for the weekly and monthly updates on the emergencies and update of the data in these websites and databases. further, we searched and included data from different preprint databases like biorxiv, ssrn, medrxiv, and aas open research. additionally, the first pages of the google scholar search system for each search term were manually analyzed for relevant articles. we tried to determine the epidemiology of mpox, including transmission dynamics, incidence, case reports, clinical history, case fatality rate, and distribution of clades. further, we included data identifying the risk factors and risk groups of mpox. two authors, n. s. and s. k. d. conducted the evaluation of eligible studies. after completion of the search of all the databases, the potential articles were selected by removing the duplicates and screening by n. s. and k. j. a. articles with specific and relevant topics were selected for all regions, all ethnicity, age group, sex, and clinical features for full‐text analyzing. we also included the articles focusing on the transmission of mpox involving animals and humans to better understand the mode of transmission. we excluded modelling and prediction studies, studies on smallpox, review articles, and studies nonrelevant to our objectives. further, critical evaluation of the quality of selected articles, analyzing for duplicated articles, and removing correspondence or comment of duplicated data were performed by n. s., s. k. d., and k. a. j. separately. the seasonal exclusion criteria could not be implemented due to lack of studies on seasonality and environmental impacts. furthermore, we could not exclude studies that did not include data on specific clades due to a lack of work. we used the systematic review centre for laboratory animal experimentation assessment tool for measuring the risk of bias.
the syrcle consists of parameters to assess different biases in studies. the parameters included detection bias, attrition bias, reporting bias, selection bias, performance bias, and other biases. the bias for each parameter was measured by using the possible outcomes as yes, no, and unclear, representing low, high, and unclear bias, respectively.
case definition a confirmed case of monkeypox virus was defined by following the uk health security agency definition: a positive result on mpox pcr assay in a specimen collected from any anatomical site is considered as a positive case. the type of the used pcr assay will be determined on the basis of local guidelines and availability of the test method. statistical analysis a total number of cases was determined for each decade by summation of the reported cases per clade. pooled statistical analyses were conducted by using sas version .. results studies included this study detected research articles on epidemiology and transmission of monkeypox virus and previously mentioned related search terms. among articles, articles were screened and considered eligible for further full‐text investigation. the excluded articles were duplicate, reviews, correspondence, editorial, and failed to have inclusion criteria. after analyzing the full texts, only studies were found to be eligible for further analysis. based on the inclusion criteria, of manuscripts were finally selected. among the selected manuscripts, we extracted epidemiological data from articles, transmission data from articles, clinical symptoms from articles, and treatment and prevention from articles. we also extracted data from two databases, including cdc and ecdc. epidemiologic features of ‐mpox outbreaks as of march a total of cases of monkeypox virus had been documented in countries worldwide. nearly, % of cases were reported from non‐endemic regions.
the highest number of cases has been reported in the americas, followed by the eu/eea.
among the affected countries, the highest numbers of cases have been documented in the united states, followed by brazil, spain, france, colombia, united kingdom, mexico, and peru, respectively. the number of mortalities is also prevalent in the united states, followed by brazil and peru.
the demographic characterization of a large number of cases reported to cdc, who, and ecdc showed that men were the most infected sex followed by women and transgender women, respectively.
further, from the age distribution of the reported cases, we documented that people aged –years had the highest frequency of infection, actually majority of the cases was reported in people aged –years.
another study, in involving patients also reported % cases in men with median age years. higher number of cases among the white people was reported from the beginning of the outbreaks in may through with time the number of latino and black or african american increased.
data from cdc supported that from june to january the frequency of black or african american increased gradually from % to % of the reported cases. unusually, the incidence of mpox was reported higher in men having homosexual and bisexual behaviors in most of the articles and databases.
prevalence of notable previous hiv and sexually transmitted infections among the mpox cases was also documented. majority of the studies and cases reported to cdc, who, and ecdc have also identified hiv as the primary pre‐existing health conditions.
the epidemiological curve of the first wave of mpox pandemic has been visualized. one peak with the highest number of confirmed cases reaching cases/day was apparently confined within a period of months, july to october . however, mpox‐associated deaths continued with same pace during july to february .
the highest number of deaths in a single day was recorded in november followed by december and january .
compared to the epidemiologic characteristics of the last five decades, we observed unusual features of ‐mpox outbreaks.
the spread of non‐travelers’ cases in non‐endemic regions and the large number of cases in a single outbreak are the most unique characteristics of ongoing outbreaks.
the case fatality rate has also reduced significantly in this mpox pandemic.
further, in mode of transmission we have noticed majority of the study identified involvement of sexual activities in cases of human‐to‐human transmission. another significant unusual characteristic was the higher frequency of cases identified among men who have sex with men and hiv patients.
as the pandemic is progressing more studies are required to characterize the epidemiology. epidemiologic features of endemic, sporadic cases, and outbreaks after the first report of mpox case in the democratic republic of the congo during 1970s, the outbreaks remained sporadic and endemic in african regions till .
during the first three decades, monkeypox virus was documented in drc, nigeria, coˆte d'ivoire, cameroon, liberia, and sierra leone. a gradual increase of cases and affected countries continued in the following two decades.
the endemic cases of monkeypox virus were mostly reported in central and west african countries, including drc, central african republic, republic of the congo, cameroon, gabon, liberia, nigeria, sierra leone, and south sudan before the ‐mpox outbreak.
after the first report, drc remained the most affected country with documented confirmed and probable cases of mpox.
after 1970s, the confirmed cases increased in drc by many folds in every decade.
documented confirmed probable or possible mpox cases were during –in –in –and suspected cases were about in –and in –.
however, due to underreporting a large portion of cases might have not been documented in this surveillance. after drc, the greatest number of cases have been reported from nigeria followed by republic of the congo and the car.
in monkeypox virus was detected for the first time in the united states and outside africa.
about confirmed cases were reported linked to infected gambian pouched rats from ghana.
after that report, no case of monkeypox virus was documented for more than years. recently in the first case of monkeypox virus in the united kingdom was documented followed by one case in israel in one case in in singapore, three cases in united kingdom, and one case in the united states in .
the documented cases outside africa after were travellers’ cases linked with the outbreaks of mpox in nigeria during to .
starting in the last quarter of the outbreak continued through and confirmed cases were documented with a case fatality ratio of .% from states of nigeria.
probable under‐reporting of monkeypox virus has occurred during to due to covid‐pandemic. clade distribution of monkeypox virus three distinct clades of monkeypox virus have been defined, namely i, iia, and iib by happi et al.
two accepted nomenclatures of genome of monkeypox virus had been reported, namely hmpxv1 focusing on the human‐to‐human transmissible recent isolates after outbreaks and monkeypox virus including broad diversity of viruses from the discovery till now.
in the phylogenetic analysis of monkeypox virus, it was documented that isolates from clade iib were associated with ‐outbreak. the tree included genome and mpxv‐m5312_hm12_rivers was used as the reference sequence. calculated average divergence of clade iib was between .and ..
data from about whole genome were included for hmpxv1. all of the whole‐genome sequences of hmpxv1 are from the clade iia. about lineages have been identified based on the genetic divergence till december .
predominance of lineage b.is evident followed by b..b..b..b..b..a, b..b..and b..respectively. the tree was built by using the maximum composite likelihood model and mpxv‐m5312_hm12_rivers was used as the reference sequence. from the phylogenetic tree we can see that isolates from lineage b.and subsequent lineages were more common in europe, north america, and south america during to march . after the ‐mpox outbreak, the spread of isolates from lineage b.and related lineages including b..b..b..and b..occurred rapidly in europe and north america. these data may represent partial diversity as the sequencing of large number of cases is ongoing. recently evolving lineages of hmpxv1 have an estimated evolutionary rate of ~× −subs per site per year. the highest divergence that was calculated for the circulation lineages was .. the ongoing pandemic isolates of b.lineage and associated segregated lineages have a strong evolutionary relationship with the isolates of –outbreaks in nigeria.
the isolates of b.lineage and their descendants have evolved and acquired successful human‐to‐human transmission capability. though the natural history of mpox pandemic is not well understood, it has several characteristic features than the previous mpox endemic cases, outbreaks, and sporadic cases. the most notable epidemiological features of newly evolved isolates include a defined risk group, namely msm, sexual transmission, and increased median age than previous outbreaks. the pandemic lineages have probably undergone genetic evolution before the onset of the first case of the ongoing pandemic in the first quarter of and acquired more changes in the genome through human‐to‐human transmission. extensive studies are required to determine the relationship of evolutionary changes with the newly identified pandemic characteristics. transmission of mpox virus during outbreaks transmission of mpox virus has been occurring since 1960s in the nonhuman primates. evidence of animal‐to‐animal transmission both in the natural environment and laboratory is well documented.
the natural history of mpox virus is yet to be understood well. in the endemic areas, the zoonotic transmission was the most prominent source of human infection. however, over time the evidence of animal‐to‐human and human‐to‐human transmission increased in africa. close contact with the lesions and body fluids of diseased animals during different activities like deforestation, hunting, slaughtering, and butchering contributed to interspecies transmission of animal‐to‐human infection. further, animals like rodents get infected when they come in contact with lesions or body fluids of diseased humans. however, virological confirmation is lacking in central and west african countries on the interspecies transmission of mpox virus. the cessation of smallpox vaccination since 1980s contributed to the wanning of cross‐protection against monkeypox virus.
human‐to‐human transmission of monkeypox virus has been reported in both central and west african countries.
contact with skin lesions and fluids of indexed patients among the family members and healthcare providers was the most attributed risk of transmission of monkeypox virus. contaminated fomites, bedding, and clothing also contributed to the transmission.
sexual transmission of monkeypox virus before the outbreak was not prominent. human‐to‐human transmission in both clade i and clade ii was documented before the ‐mpox pandemic in the endemic regions of africa. the growth was estimated below both for the clade i and clade ii in endemic and pandemic cases. traveler cases were mostly reported from clade ii and the virus was carried outside the endemic areas. limited evidence on transmission chains support smaller clusters of infection from the indexed patient can occur. as the ongoing outbreak involves the largest number of human cases, the knowledge of the diversity of transmission continues to evolve. majority of the studies reported evidence of sexual activities for transmission of monkeypox virus in non‐endemic regions in . the clinical, epidemiological, and virological findings strongly support the sexual transmission of monkeypox virus from indexed patients to susceptible persons. direct contact with the lesions especially on the skin of the genital, anus, anorectum, and throat of patients during sexual activities contributed to the transmission of monkeypox virus among the people.
transmission of monkeypox virus in people after sexual activities with presymptomatic patients has been documented. however, transmission from asymptomatic patients is not reported yet. virological data on several studies have documented infectious monkeypox virus in semen in patients. recent studies have reported a higher prevalence and concentration of mpox dna in semen samples of the infected men.
several studies have reported that isolated dna of monkeypox virus from the lesions of anogenital skin and semen has the capability to infect cell lines like vero e6 cells and produce cytopathic effects.
however, these are preliminary studies to define and characterize the transmission of monkeypox virus via semen. we have also analyzed several studies reporting early evidence of droplet transmission of monkeypox virus via the respiratory route. nosocomial infection among the healthcare providers has been documented. transmission via sharp instruments, piercing, and tattooing have also been documented.
there is limited evidence on the fomite transmission of monkeypox virus via contaminated surfaces and objects. however, the potential of contamination of different household objects by monkeypox virus should be evaluated in detail. studies have documented the presence of infectious monkeypox virus on lesions and major secretions, including urine, feces, nasal or oral droplets and conjunctival exudates in humans and animals.
during ‐outbreak the probable route of transmission included direct contact, ingestion, and inhalation. pre‐mpox outbreaks and sporadic cases have transmitted to humans via bites from infected animals, contact with lesions or fluids and blood of infected organs, and aerosols.
no confirmed sexual transmission was reported before outbreak.
both animal and person‐to‐person transmission were reported from pre‐outbreaks. however, during outbreak person‐to‐person transmission became the major source of transmission. it is unlikely that person‐to‐person transmission can maintain the virus in humans for a longer period. besides human‐to‐human transmission, monkeypox virus has been reported among a diverse group of animals.
the full host range of monkeypox virus is unknown. documented cases of monkeypox virus include different animals like old and new world monkeys, apes, rodents, shrews, pigs, small mammals, and dogs.
nonhuman primates in both the wild environment including chimpanzees and monkeys of genera cercopithecus and captivities including captive gorillas, gibbons, asian orangutans, chimpanzees, marmosets, siamiri and macaca have been documented with clinical infection of mpox.
in a larger outbreak of monkeypox virus started from gambian giant pouched rats and transmitted to different animals like north american black‐tailed prairie dogs, groundhog/woodchuck, dormice, rope squirrels, jerboa, and opossums in the united states. with greater genetic divergence, isolates of clade i were mainly involved in the infection of nonhuman primates in central african regions. further, isolates of clade iia were transmitted to diverse groups of animals in west africa and outside endemic regions, including europe and the united states.
the reservoir of mpox viruses is still undermined. small mammals or rodents in africa are thought to be reservoirs. probably, clade i and clade ii are maintained in different animal species. clinical manifestations of patients with monkeypox virus associated with outbreak monkeypox virus‐infected patients have reported several characteristic clinical symptoms. majority of the recent studies have documented symptomatic infections.
only a limited number of studies have reported asymptomatic cases. among clinical manifestations, characteristic skin rash was the most common followed by fever, headache, lymphadenopathy, and myalgia.
these symptoms were also common during the pre‐outbreaks and sporadic cases. however, the sites of the characteristic skin rash have changed during the outbreaks. majority of the studies have reported genital, perianal, anal as the most common sites of rash followed by trunk, upper limb, oral and peri‐oral areas among the patients. however, pre‐outbreaks did not report about genital, anal, and perianal rash in higher frequency.
among other symptoms, lethargy and pharyngitis were reported in the majority of the studies.
another newly described symptom among the monkeypox virus cases was proctitis, which was documented in significant frequency among patients during the outbreak. hospitalization and intensive care units admission were required for only a limited number of patients.
only two of the studies reported deaths of mpox patients. compared to the pre‐outbreaks, the number of deaths is less in the outbreak.
monkeypox virus‐infected patients suffer from various health complications. among them, bacterial superinfection was mostly reported followed by abscesses, bilateral ocular complications, encephalitis, pneumonia, parapharyngeal abscess, mouth ulcers, corneal ulcers, penile edema, balanitis, sepsis, myocarditis, corneal ulcers, and conjunctivitis.
treatment and prevention of mpox virus infected people until now there has been no specific medicine or treatment option available against mpox infection.
drugs used in the treatment of smallpox can be used for special cases of mpox.
however, the safety and efficacy of tecovirimat in treating people with monkeypox virus is not well‐studied and the food and drug administration and cdc have not approved the drug as a treatment option.
in severe cases, only tecovirimat is approved to be used with proper concern of the patients. only the healthcare provider will decide where to use tecovirimat. other antivirals, including brincidofovir and cidofovir, have also been used in several conditions of mpox infection. cidofovir, fda approved injection‐based antiviral against cytomegalovirus infection.
recently, it has been used to treat patients with monkeypox virus. the specific effects of cidofovir on the outcome of monkeypox virus need to be studied in detail. cidofovir is also not approved for use in treating mpox by fda or cdc. brincidofovir is an oral formulation of cidofovir. it is already approved for the treatment of smallpox by fda. however, a limited number of studies have reported the effectiveness of brincidofovir against mpox infection. in animal models, brincidofovir has also provided effectiveness against orthopoxvirus infections also.
however, the specific effectiveness and side effects of these antivirals in mpox patients need to be evaluated in more detail. termination of smallpox vaccination contributed toward the uprise of monkeypox virus cases. the available smallpox vaccine is successful to provide about % protection.
the smallpox vaccine provides good cross‐protection against mpox infection. for the prevention of mpox, vaccines, including jynneostm and acam2000®, are approved and used for pre‐ and post‐prophylaxis in specific patients. jynneostm is a ‐dose vaccine.
for vaccinations with jynneostm, a list of recommendation from cdc, usa should be followed. another vaccine called aventis pasteur smallpox vaccine is also authorized for emergency purposes where the other two vaccines are unavailable or restricted for use.
discussion mpox outbreak during became one of the major public health threats.
this systematic review integrated epidemiological, clinical, and transmission data of outbreak of mpox. we used a structured format of data analysis and provided a real‐world overview of mpox outbreak. beginning from the early the cases of monkeypox virus started to increase rapidly.
this is one of the first systematic reviews reporting human‐to‐human transmission of monkeypox virus involving about people in regions. in mpox history, it is the largest known outbreak. local transmission of mpox involving large number of cases in non‐endemic regions has never been documented before outbreak. about % cases were reported from these non‐endemic regions.
the highest number of cases was reported in the americas and eu/eea regions, which is the first time in the history of monkeypox virus. the majority of the cases have been documented in the united states, followed by brazil, spain, france, and colombia, respectively. however, before this outbreak cases of monkeypox virus have never exceeded in these countries.
there are several reasons behind this dramatic outbreak of monkeypox virus in the non‐endemic regions. first of all, waning of mass immunity against smallpox has contributed toward the larger outbreak of monkeypox virus. vaccines against smallpox are effective in providing protection against monkeypox virus. second, genetic changes and evolution of monkeypox virus may have contributed to the changing epidemiology. finally, the unaware acts, including lack of knowledge of the mode of transmission of monkeypox virus, involvement in sexual activities of the infected people without proper protection, and traveling, have also contributed to massive spread of monkeypox virus during outbreak, which is supported by previous studies.
this ‐mpox outbreak may be a sign of a larger pandemic of mopox in the future. without proper investigation and epidemiological analysis, it will be difficult to prevent mpox outbreaks in the future. majority of the studies have reported characteristic epidemiological pattern of ‐mpox outbreak distinguished from sporadic cases and local outbreaks reported during the last years in african countries. the majority of the cases were reported among men.
further, the age of the infected was also distinct from pre‐outbreaks and cases. most of the cases were reported in people aged between and years, which is a new characteristic of outbreak. in previous outbreaks in central and west african countries most of the cases were reported in people aged below years or among young children.
our analysis finds that a continuous increase in the median age of infected people is occurring. during –mpox was primarily reported among children aged to years, during –among people aged years and during –among people aged years.
the majority of the deaths associated with monkeypox virus were also reported among children aged below years before . however, after the death rate has shifted swiftly to people aged greater than years. this study suggests that epidemiological changes in mpox outbreaks have been ongoing with consistent changes since . however, majority of the studies on pre‐outbreaks have documented animals as the primary source of monkeypox virus transmission and human‐to‐human cases were rare. during the ‐outbreak we detect that majority of the cases were human‐to‐human transmitted.
these epidemiological changes are probably the result of genetic changes of the virus and origin of strains with altered properties and changes in human behaviors. among the methods of transmission, direct contact with lesions, body fluids, nonliving objects contaminated with monkeypox virus and droplets contributed to the majority of the cases.
specifically, msm got infected from their partner through direct contact during sexual activities. majority of the cases were reported by msm men during ‐mpox outbreak. however, none of the pre‐studies have reported about the high prevalence of monkeypox virus among msm men.
another major characteristic of this outbreak was the presence of previous sexually transmitted diseases, including hiv, syphilis, and gonorrhea among the monkeypox virus cases. about %–% of the cases had previous records of hiv‐positive health conditions. these findings are fully supported by the published original research and systematic articles.
however, studies on the correlation between the presence of hiv and other stis with monkeypox virus are limited and fail to determine their health impact. characteristic clinical presentations of monkeypox virus cases in outbreak were different from previous outbreaks and sporadic cases. the majority of the lesions were unevenly distributed in the genitals, perianal, anogenital, trunk, and forearm regions of the patients.
further, report of fever, weakness, pharyngitis, and proctitis were more common during outbreak than pre‐outbreaks. majority of the cases were reported in the outpatient ward in this outbreak, which was inpatient for pre‐outbreaks. this study documented that monkeypox virus from clades i, iia, and iib were involved in previous outbreaks depending on the geographic regions. however, during the outbreak, % of the isolates were from clade iib with divergence of .–.. about lineages of clade iib evolved and transmitted during outbreak. in the united states and europe, isolates from b.lineage were the most predominant, followed by b..and b... monkeypox virus variants from clade iib were involved in the majority of the cases and responsible for distinct epidemiological features from pre‐outbreaks. as more human‐to‐human transmission occur the changes in the genome accelerated.
lineage i and iia were confined to the majority of the cases in central africa and west africa, respectively. however, emergence of the new west african lineage, iib, was involved with large number of cases outside africa and in outbreak. before outbreak, isolates from lineage iia were capable of infecting a large number of wild animals, laboratory animals, and from animal to humans.
though the natural history of monkeypox virus is not fully known, it is predicted that without the animal host, monkeypox virus cannot continue its infection cycle for a longer period in humans alone. however, isolates from iib have several distinct epidemiological and clinical characteristics. newer transmission routes of monkeypox virus have been identified during outbreak, which contributed to the larger community outbreak.
for treatment and prevention, no drug or vaccine is approved against monkeypox virus. however, vaccination against smallpox has a good protective effect against monkeypox virus and can be used in specific situations. the main strength of this study is the using of bias free approach to integrate the findings. this study included well‐defined terms and broad search strategy on mpox without the limit of language, time, and place. in addition, a wide source of information, including gray literature, was also analyzed. however, this study has few limitations. a lower number of actual cases may be presented due to lack of active and proper surveillance. lack of studies on asymptomatic cases might have influenced the transmission characterization. conclusion the reduction of immunity against smallpox due to discontinuation of vaccination has contributed to the reappearance of monkeypox virus. evolution of lineage iib with great capacity to spread from human‐to‐human has impact on the larger outbreak of mpox in the nonendemic regions. we documented distinct epidemiological, clinical, and transmission properties of monkeypox virus during outbreak. this study reported that men aged –years with specific sexual behavior contributed to majority of the infected people. furthermore, household transmission and human‐to‐human transmission were two main sources of community outbreak. we also detected that distinct clinical feature included appearance of lesions on the genitals, anogenital, perianal, and trunk were common. this study provided an integrated insight into the epidemiology, clinical features, evolution, and transmission of monkeypox virus. author contributions nadim sharif: conceptualization; data curation; formal analysis; investigation; methodology; resources; software; validation; writing—original draft; writing—review & editing. nazmul sharif: data curation; formal analysis; project administration; writing—original draft. khalid j. alzahrani: methodology; writing—original draft. ibrahim f. halawani: formal analysis; writing—review & editing. fuad m. alzahrani: software; writing—review & editing. isabel de la torre díez: software; writing—review & editing. vivían lipari: data curation; validation. miguel angel lópez flores: formal analysis; writing—review & editing. anowar khasru parvez: formal analysis; writing—review & editing. shuvra kanti dey: data curation; resources; supervision; validation. conflict of interest statement the authors declare no conflict of interest. ethics statement this study was ethically approved by the biosafety, biosecurity & ethical committee of jahangirnagar university. transparency statement the lead author nadim sharif affirms that this manuscript is an honest, accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported; that no important aspects of the study have been omitted; and that any discrepancies from the study as planned have been explained.
infection prevention and control measures to reduce the transmission of mpox: a systematic review abstract objectives to make inferences regarding the effectiveness of respiratory interventions and case isolation measures in reducing or preventing the transmission of mpox based on synthesis of available literature. methods the who clinical management and infection prevention and control guideline and droplet precautions in healthcare facilities and home isolation infection prevention control measures for patients with mpox. we conducted a systematic review that included a broad search of five electronic databases. in a two-stage process, we initially sought only randomized controlled trials and observational comparative studies; when the search failed to yield eligible studies, the subsequent search included all study designs including clinical and environmental sampling studies. results no studies were identified that directly addressed airborne and droplet precautions and home isolation infection prevention control measures. to inform the review questions the review team synthesized route of transmission data in mpox. there were /cases in which investigators identified mpox infection occurring following transmission through direct physical sexual contact. there were no reported mpox cases in which investigators identified inhalation as a single route of transmission. there were /cases in which investigators identified fomite as a single route of transmission. clinical and environmental sampling studies isolated mpox virus in a minority of saliva, oropharangeal swabs, mpox skin lesions, and hospital room air. conclusions current findings provide compelling evidence that transmission of mpox occurs through direct physical contact. because investigators have not reported any cases of transmission via inhalation alone, the impact of airborne and droplet infection prevention control measures in reducing transmission will be minimal. avoiding physical contact with others, covering mpox lesions and wearing a medical mask is likely to reduce onward mpox transmission; there may be minimal reduction in transmission from additionally physically isolating patients with mild disease at home. introduction mpox is a zoonotic disease caused by mpox virus, an enveloped double-stranded dna virus in the orthopoxvirus genus of the poxviridae family. the world health organization declared mpox a public health emergency of international concern between july2022 and may . the mpox outbreak was associated with sustained human-to-human transmission that had not been previously described. historically, mpox occurred primarily in central and west africa, with infection commonly reported in persons who had contact with probable animal reservoirs, cases of secondary transmission were most often reported in household contacts. increased incidence in endemic areas of central and west africa over the past forty to fifty years coincides with the cessation of smallpox vaccination and eradication programmes. there are two distinct clades of mpox virus, clade i and clade ii. clade ii consists of two subclades, clade iia and clade iib. mpox incubates between five to days and typically presents symptoms in two stages: the invasion period lasting from zero to five days characterized by fever, headache, lymphadenopathy, back pain, myalgia, and asthenia; following this, skin symptoms may appear between one to three days from onset of fever, with a rash evolving from macules to papules, vesicles, pustules and then crusts, often affecting the face, extremities, oral mucous membranes, and genitalia. suspected or confirmed transmission routes of mpox include direct physical contact with an infected patient, indirect contact, inhalation of fomites or infectious droplets, inoculation and transplacental transmission. human infection is also possible from contact with infected animals. areas of uncertainty exist concerning the potential for asymptomatic transmission or the transmission potential of other possible routes, such as breastmilk, semen, vaginal fluids, urine, faeces or insect vectors. there is a need for interventions to prevent the transmission of mpox. the effectiveness of any ipc measures for mpox depends on route of transmission of mpox virus. the who clinical management and infection prevention and control guideline development group developed two research questions concerning airborne and droplet ipc interventions and one question concerning case physical isolation interventions in mpox. it was expected that scarce evidence, if any, from randomized controlled trials or comparative interventional trials would exist to inform the research questions. as such, it was anticipated that the review questions could be informed indirectly using data on the number of incident cases of mpox by route of transmission and clinical and environmental sampling studies demonstrating viral culture positivity. this is based on the inference that mpox infections will be reduced through interventions targeting the most frequently reported routes of transmission of mpox virus. in the case of ipc interventions targeting airborne and droplet precautions and interventions targeting physical home isolation of cases, if there are a significant number of cases of infection transmitted by inhalation of virus aerosols, droplets or fomites and/or strong viral culture positivity from samples representative of these routes of transmission, interventions directed at preventing transmission via these route would be of importance. therefore, we conducted a systematic review in two stages—the first stage seeks evidence from comparative interventional trials, and the second stage seeks evidence from all other study designs—to inform the infection prevention and control guideline recommendations regarding use of airborne and droplet precautions to mpox transmission and physical isolation of mpox patients. objective • to make inferences regarding the effectiveness of airborne and droplet interventions and case home isolation measures in reducing or preventing the transmission of mpox based on synthesis of available literature. review questions the review followed two pre-planned protocols. the review addresses three research questions developed by the who clinical management and infection prevention and control guideline development group: . does healthcare worker use of respirator versus a medical mask when interacting with a confirmed/suspect mpox patient during the infectious period reduce mpox infections? . does the use of an airborne precaution room versus an adequately ventilated room in a healthcare facility for a mpox patient in the infectious period reduce mpox infection in health workers or patients? . does isolating a person with mpox until all lesions are fully healed versus not isolating reduce mpox infections? review stage one: review of infection prevention and control interventions for preventing mpox infection in the first stage, we aimed to synthesize evidence concerning the review question interventions from available interventional comparative studies. methods inclusion criteria types of studies population humans with laboratory confirmed mpox infection; or humans with laboratory confirmed mpox-like infection; or humans with symptoms consistent with mpox and exposure to a laboratory confirmed mpox infection or mpox-like infection. mpox-like infection is defined for the purposes of this review as infection due to orthopox viruses other than mpox that are capable of human-to-human transmission, namely buffalopox, cowpox, vaccinia, and variola. types of interventions the administration of any type of vaccine to health care workers or contacts of mpox or mpox-like virus confirmed patients was not considered an intervention type. control outcomes settings all countries and the following contexts were eligible for this review: households, congregate-living, community and healthcare settings. • rcts, controlled before-and-after studies, observational comparative studies in participants with confirmed mpox or exposed to mpox virus. • rcts or observational comparative studies in participants with exposure to or confirmed mpox-like virus infection. • airborne and droplet precautions including medical masks or use of respirators. • personal contact precautions including use of gloves, gowns, eye protection. • isolation of cases • ventilation including natural, mechanical, negative pressure gradient, positive pressure ventilated lobby. • no intervention or; • any different intervention measure used as a comparator to the intervention group in the study. • confirmed secondary mpox or mpox-like virus infection expressed as an absolute number or rate of secondary transmission. • all reported adverse effects related to the interventions. exclusion criteria studies were excluded if any of the following criteria were met: • studies published in a language other than english. • studies of designs other than rcts, controlled before-and-after studies, or observational comparative studies for participants with confirmed mpox infection or exposure to mpox. • studies of designs other than rcts or observational comparative studies in participants with viruses other than viruses defined as mpox-like viruses. • studies that did not include a review question-specific intervention to reduce or prevent the transmission of mpox or mpox-like viruses. • studies conducted in animals. literature search strategy using broad search terms including terms for mpox-like viruses and without date or language limits, the search in september included the following databases: medline, embase, biosis previews, cab abstracts, and global index medicus. the review author team instituted a call to topic experts for papers concerning the review questions for relevant studies up to 15th december . selection of studies the results of the literature searches were uploaded into distiller sr software. screening of results was undertaken according to the cochrane collaboration’s rapid review methods due to the time-sensitivity of the review findings to inform guideline development. title and abstract screening of all studies identified in the literature searches was undertaken independently by multiple review authors; one author was required to assess a study as eligible for full text screening; two authors were required to assess a study as requiring exclusion. full-text screening against the inclusion criteria was undertaken independently by multiple review authors. one author was required to assess a study as eligible for inclusion to data extraction; two review authors were required to assess a study for exclusion. authors resolved disagreement at any stage by discussion. data extraction and management we planned for two authors to extract data from all included studies using a pre-piloted data extraction form within distiller sr, however no eligible studies were identified. risk of bias assessment it was planned for two authors to independently conduct risk of bias assessments using the cochrane risk of bias tool for included randomized controlled trials and the robins-i tool for included non-randomised comparative studies; however no comparative trials were identified. results we did not identify any studies meeting the inclusion criteria for this stage of the review, so we moved to the second stage. review stage two: transmission route of mpox virus the second stage of the review aimed to synthesize evidence on mpox infection as a result of transmission using a wider range of study designs that could indirectly inform the review questions by answering the following: the infectious period is defined as the number of days since the onset of symptoms. • what is the proportion of incident cases of mpox disaggregated by route of transmission? • an incident case is defined as an individual changing from a state of non-disease to disease over a specific period of time, as reported by study authors. • what is the infectious period of mpox, disaggregated by route of transmission? methods inclusion criteria population: human participant of any age with laboratory-confirmed mpox infection or symptoms consistent with mpox and exposure to a laboratory-confirmed mpox patient or exposure to a suspected human mpox case. the who definition of a suspected case of mpox infection was used. laboratory-confirmed infection was defined as reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction positive or viral culture positive. outcomes: type of study: any scientific article of any design including clinical and environmental sampling studies. setting: all countries and all contexts. • mpox infection exclusion criteria studies were excluded if any of the following criteria were met: • studies not including a human case of laboratory confirmed mpox infection or exposure to a laboratory-confirmed mpox patient or exposure to a suspected mpox case. • studies solely concerning animal-to-animal mpox transmission or animal-to-human transmission. • studies not published in english. • experimental laboratory transmission studies. • studies meeting the inclusion criteria but not otherwise containing information relevant to the review questions. literature search strategy and selection of studies the review team used the same search strategy and methods for the selection of studies as for the first review stage. data extraction and management two authors extracted data from all included studies using a pre-piloted data extraction form within distiller sr. one author extracted all relevant data and the second author cross-checked all extracted data. data was extracted concerning characteristics of the study participants including number of primary and/or secondary cases, country, year of study, setting of transmission, clade of mpox, reported nature of contact of participants to a potential or confirmed course of mpox, study author reported modes or potential modes of transmission, and data concerning clinical or environmental sampling including sample type, and day of sample pcr or viral culture positivity from symptom onset. appraisal of study quality risk of bias assessments are related to study design. we did not identify any applicable pre-existing tool to assess the risk of bias in included case reports and case series. we therefore constructed and piloted a series of questions to appraise the quality of included case reports and case series covering aspects of representativeness and comprehensiveness of included participants. quality appraisal assessments were then undertaken independently by the review authors for all included studies; differences were resolved by discussion. data synthesis what is the proportion of incident cases of mpox disaggregated by route of transmission? two authors independently categorized all reported human mpox cases from identified studies by route of transmission. authors resolved disagreement at any stage by discussion. authors assigned the following route of transmission to each case as applicable: direct sexual physical contact, direct non-sexual physical contact, fomite, inhalation, transplacental, needlestick, ingestion or unknown. the routes of transmission are defined as: the review team then categorized all cases into one of three categories: single route of transmission resulting in infection reasonably identified, multiple routes of transmission resulting in infection possible, and unknown route of transmission resulting in infection. the category of a single route of transmission applied when sufficient data concerning the case history, epidemiology, and/or clinical details was reported to reasonably judge that a single route of transmission leading to an mpox infection had occurred. the category of multiple possible routes of transmission applied when more than one route of transmission was judged as reasonably possible to result in an mpox infection based on reported information. authors applied the category of unknown when there was insufficient information reported in the study to assign or hypothesize any route of transmission in a case of mpox infection. the number of incident mpox cases for each route and category of transmission is reported as a whole number and percentage of the total. data are presented for each route of transmission category, by mpox clade, and by route of transmission in the healthcare and household settings. data that could inform the subgroups of the full review questions within the research questions is summarized. authors separated data from included studies into either human mpox clinical samples or environmental samples from an environment occupied by an mpox case. the review team assigned data concerning environmental air sampling, mask sampling, and upper respiratory tract clinical sampling to the review questions concerning prevention of airborne transmission. data concerning environmental surface sampling and clinical sampling of active skin lesions were assigned to the review question concerning case isolation measures. within these categories the review team identified and summarized longitudinal studies and cross-sectional studies that attempted viral isolation. the number of samples for each category is presented. • direct sexual physical contact: transmission occurring in the context of any type of sexual activity, including oral sex, penetrative anal or vaginal sex, or hand-to-genital contact. • direct non-sexual physical contact: direct physical touch with the exclusion of any sexual physical contact as defined above. • fomite: indirect contact transmission involving contact of a susceptible host with a contaminated object or surface. • inhalation: occurs when infectious particles, of any size, travel through the air, enter and are deposited at any point within the respiratory tract of a person. this form of transmission can occur when the infectious particles have travelled either a short- or long-range from the infected person. • transplacental: transmission via the placenta from mother to foetus​. • percutaneous injury: transmission via percutaneous injury with a contaminated object, such as a needle. • what is the infectious period of mpox, disaggregated by route of transmission? summary of findings and assessment of certainty of the evidence a summary of findings table is presented for each review question. data to inform the outcome of mpox infection is inferred from the number of reported mpox cases by route of transmission. data from clinical and environmental sampling studies, representing lower quality evidence, is narratively summarized in the results section. the rating of the certainty of evidence is based on the grade approach for observational studies following the grade guidance as recommended in the grade handbook. search results the searches identified unique records. authors assessed the full text of studies; studies were included and studies were excluded. the study selection process is presented in s1 fig. included studies studies reported cases of human-to-human mpox as a result of transmission. studies were conducted prior to the outbreak and studies were published during . the region of acquisition of infection was reported as follows: studies from africa, study from the eastern mediterranean region, studies from europe, studies from north america, and studies from south america. studies reported on cases acquired from multiple world regions, and studies did not report the country of infection acquisition. no studies concerning mpox-like viruses met the inclusion criteria. there were studies that provided data concerning clinical and environmental sampling. studies in which a denominator was not reported were not included. quality assessment of included studies the quality of assessment results are available in s3 appendix. studies generally differed in active case finding and in the reporting of sufficient information to hypothesize route of transmission of mpox virus. included cases there were cases of human-to-human transmission resulting in mpox infection. all cases of human-to-human acquisition were included; it was not always possible to determine whether a case was a primary or index case. table displays included cases by age and gender. most cases were males over the age of years.it was not possible to disaggregate age and gender for /of cases. results: review question and review questions and are considered together as they concern airborne and droplet ipc interventions. the summary of findings for review question are presented in table and the summary of findings for review question are presented in table . number of incident cases by route of transmission most cases of mpox infection reasonably concluded by review authors to have resulted from a single transmission route occurred through direct physical sexual contact. where they could identify a single route of human-to-human transmission resulting in mpox infection, investigators reported no cases in which inhalation could reasonably have been the singular mode of mpox virus transmission. nine studies reported cases of clade iia and four studies reported cases of clade iib. nineteen studies reported cases as west african clade in before the change in clade nomenclature in august . since they occurred in it is assumed these cases are likely to be clade iib. twenty-eight studies were published prior to that did not report clade of included cases. fifty-two studies were published in that did not report a clade of included cases. most cases of mpox infection resulting from direct physical sexual contact as a single route of transmission were considered to be likely to be clade iib, the clade associated with the –mpox outbreak. the two cases of mpox infection resulting from fomite transmission were clade iib. there were no cases of mpox virus clade i reported in which a single route of transmission resulting in infection could reasonably be identified. reported cases by clade in which multiple routes of transmission were judged as reasonably possible by review authors, or the route of transmission was unknown, are available in the s4 table. eight studies reported cases of transmission resulting in mpox infection within a healthcare setting in which route of transmission may have been direct physical contact, fomite or inhalation. due to limited information reported by study authors, the review team were unable to disaggregate data further. there were cases that authors reported to have occurred within a household setting; however, due to limited reported information, no further disaggregation by route of transmission proved possible.authors reported possible routes of human-to-human transmission resulting in infection as inhalation, fomite, direct sexual physical contact and direct physical non-sexual contact. clinical and environmental sampling two studies attempted viral isolation from respiratory tract samples of patients with mpox; mpox virus was isolated from saliva in /of samples between days and from symptom onset and in /oropharyngeal samples taken on day from symptom onset. authors identified two studies in which viral isolation was attempted from air samples collected in hospital rooms solely occupied by individuals with mpox; replication competent virus was identified in one air sample in one study. subgroups health care worker transmission health care workers were the population of interest in review questions and . a healthcare worker in the united kingdom in was diagnosed with mpox after changing the bed linen of a confirmed mpox patient using an apron and gloves; there was no direct physical contact with the mpox patient. investigators judged that transmission was possibly by fomite or inhalational route. three studies reported mpox infection in a healthcare worker through percutaneous injury with a contaminated sharp object that had been in contact with an mpox lesion. patient-to-patient transmission an outcome in review question concerned the risk of transmission to patients. two studies were identified that provided relevant data. jezek et al reported mpox in a child in the democratic republic of the congo who had visited a hospital several times where another child with confirmed mpox had been admitted. there was no known physical contact between the two. the child with subsequent mpox infection had walked past the mpox infected child in an outdoor space in the hospital grounds and past the mpox patient isolation area. the mpox infected child and the child who subsequently developed mpox had also received injections on the same day at the hospital in which one syringe and needles were being reused for all injections. review authors hypothesized fomite or inhalation transmission. learned et al reported a case of mpox in a patient hospitalized for malaria and in the same hospital as patients with mpox; authors reported no further information. certainty of the evidence certainty of evidence commenced at a rating of low due to inclusion of observational study designs. evidence from observational studies indicated that mpox was transmitted, in almost all occasions, by direct physical contact. we further found compelling evidence that mpox transmission by inhalation did not occur, or if it did, was extremely unusual. for review question the logical inference was made that if there are no or almost no cases of transmission by inhalation, use of a respirator by a health care worker would prevent either none or very few mpox transmissions. the evidence is therefore at least moderate certainty of little or no benefit in preventing transmission from respirator use. similarly, for review question the evidence is at least moderate that the use of an airborne precaution room probably has little to no impact on preventing mpox transmission. the certainty of the evidence for review questions and is thus based on logical inferences in this situation in which a formal comparison is lacking. results: review question review question concerned ipc interventions related to the physical isolation of mpox patients with active lesions. incident cases by route of transmission in situations in which investigators could identify a single route of human-to-human transmission resulting in infection, /cases were transmitted via direct physical sexual contact, /cases were transmitted via direct physical non-sexual contact, and /cases via fomites. confirmed clade iib or cases likely to be clade iib form the majority of the data. the two cases of infection transmitted via fomites occurred in healthcare workers who visited a patient’s home for one hour, wore personal protective equipment during the visit, used gloves when taking clinical samples, and did not directly physically touch the patient. it was identified that some equipment used by the healthcare workers may not have been decontaminated before being handled without personal protective equipment. clinical and environmental samples eight studies reported attempts to isolate virus from lesion samples. in four studies reporting the date of clinical sampling from symptom onset, /of lesion samples contained replication competent virus. in four studies in which the day of sampling was not documented, virus isolation was reported in .% of lesion samples. five studies attempted viral isolation from environmental surface samples. each study sampled high-touch surfaces and items that had been in close contact with infected persons. studies conducted within hospitals included sampling of the anterooms in which personal protective equipment was doffed and disposed, and sampling of the personal protective equipment. gould et al included sampling of a deposition area in each room which was unlikely to have been touched by patients or staff. morgan et al compared the frequency and quantity of virus detection from samples of non-porous and porous articles; authors reported that detection of viable virus was significantly more frequent from samples collected from porous materials. the frequency of detection of replication competent virus was between and % in surface samples. certainty of the evidence certainty of evidence commenced at a rating of low due to inclusion of observational study designs. evidence from observational studies indicated that mpox was transmitted, in almost all occasions, by direct physical contact. there were very few cases of fomite transmission. the logical inference was made that there may be minimal added benefits to physically isolating cases provided all lesions are covered, direct physical contact with others is avoided and a medical mask is worn. the certainty of the evidence for review question is based on a logical inference in this situation in which a formal comparison is lacking. discussion we found no evidence from randomized controlled trials or observational comparative studies concerning airborne and droplet interventions or case physical isolation measures in mpox or mpox-like viruses capable of human-to-human transmission. investigators reported no cases of mpox infection in which transmission by inhalation could reasonably be identified as the single route of transmission. investigators reported out of cases in which mpox virus could have reasonably been exclusively transmitted resulting in infection through fomites. in comparison, in /cases investigators identified transmission resulting in infection occurring through direct physical sexual contact. study investigators identified infectious mpox virus in saliva and oropharyngeal swabs and identified competent virus in /air samples. viral isolation was successful in /of lesion samples from studies; surface sampling in domestic and healthcare environments in studies detected viable mpox virus in .% of samples. the presence of infectious virus in clinical samples and environmental samples provides only very low certainty evidence regarding risk of transmission that may lead to infection. there is scarce data concerning transmission of mpox to health care workers. mpox infection in healthcare workers was identified through percutaneous injury in three cases and through possible fomite or inhalation in one case. strengths and limitations this review is strengthened by a comprehensive search strategy across multiple databases and authors independently assessed all studies for eligibility in duplicate to identify all possible relevant literature. further, a clear conceptual data framework to address the research questions was undertaken; key data from all available literature that could inform the research questions was identified and synthesized in the two review stages. this review is limited by the existing available evidence base on mpox. the review team utilized only broad search terms inclusive of terms for mpox-like viruses however no comparative interventional studies were identified. there is limited epidemiological evidence on the risk of fomite and inhalational transmission, and limited evidence on the infectious period for different routes of transmission. inclusion of studies in english only may have influenced the completeness of findings. we expect publication bias to be sensitive to transmission routes resulting in infection; that is, if a route of transmission had been identified by investigators, this is likely to be published and captured for inclusion in the review and conversely, if a route of transmission had been not found, it is unlikely to be published. another limitation of the review is the time elapsed since the literature search date and the call to topic experts in december to identify any further evidence. we are not aware of any systematic reviews addressing the same review questions covering the same scope or with as comprehensive inclusion criteria since the date of our literature search. to our knowledge there is also no known prior systematic review investigating airborne or droplet precautions or case home isolation ipc measures for mpox or mpox-like viruses. this review is an example of evidence synthesis methods in an area of scarce literature to answer key public health questions. implications for practice and research the findings of this review provide compelling evidence that transmission of mpox resulting in infection occurs primarily through direct physical contact. this finding agrees with a recent analysis of global surveillance data reporting the most common route of transmission in the mpox outbreak was direct physical sexual contact. secondary household attack rates are estimated to be % overall. household contact is the most common reported route of acquisition of infection amongst children, but sexual contact is the commonest reported route of transmission amongst adults. marshall et al investigated exposures amongst healthcare workers in different settings, noting duration and type of contact as well as personal protective equipment used. no cases of mpox resulted from a range of contacts including direct skin-to-skin contact with lesions and exposure to aerosol generating proceedures with or without ffp3/n95 masks. most of these contacts were brief. it is difficult to distinguish between the transmission risk posed by close physical non-sexual contact and sexual contact. however more skin exposure, contact between mucous membranes or duration of contact may increase risk of transmission. in the global mpox outbreak, primary lesions commonly occurring at sites of sexual contact e.g. genital/anorectal or oral lesions and clustering of lesions at those sites support the conclusion that direct sexual contact is an important route of transmission. in line with current guidance, avoidance of direct contact with skin lesions would likely reduce risk of transmission. epidemiological evidence and data from clinical and environmental sampling provides limited support for the hypothesis that inhalation or fomite modes of transmission are significant. replication competent virus has been identified in saliva; precautions to avoid direct exposure to respiratory droplets may be appropriate pending further data. the impact of airborne and droplet ipc measures in reducing transmission may be small. there is potential for shedding of infectious virus onto surfaces from lesions of detached scabs; covering mpox lesions is likely to reduce onward transmission however there is probably minimal reduction in transmission from added physical isolation of patients. suitable cleaning protocols and caution around sharing items such as bedding or towels which may be contaminated is recommended in some settings. multiple factors such as route of exposure, infecting dose, susceptibility of the exposed individual would likely affect the relative risk of transmission resulting in infection. currently, recommendations for airborne and droplet precautions and case home isolation ipc measures in mpox rely on expert opinion and inferences from data concerning transmission frequency by route of transmission. conclusion no available evidence from comparative interventional studies addressing airborne and droplet precautions and case home isolation ipc measures to prevent the transmission of mpox exists. current findings suggest that transmission resulting in infection occurs primarily through direct physical contact. no cases of transmission resulting in infection via inhalation were identified; the impact of airborne and droplet ipc measures in reducing transmission may be minimal. covering mpox lesions, wearing a medical mask and avoiding physical contact with others is likely to reduce onward transmission; there is probably minimal additional reduction in transmission from also physically isolating patients. further research is needed into effective ipc measures to reduce the transmission of mpox, especially in the event of any future outbreak and in endemic settings. supporting information
a comprehensive review of monkeypox virus and mpox characteristics abstract monkeypox virus is the etiological agent of monkeypox, a zoonotic disease. mpxv is endemic in the forested regions of west and central africa, but the virus has recently spread globally, causing outbreaks in multiple non-endemic countries. in this paper, we review the characteristics of the virus, including its ecology, genomics, infection biology, and evolution. we estimate by phylogenomic molecular clock that the b.lineage responsible for the mpox outbreaks has been in circulation since . we interrogate the host-virus interactions that modulate the virus infection biology, signal transduction, pathogenesis, and host immune responses. we highlight the changing pathophysiology and epidemiology of mpxv and summarize recent advances in the prevention and treatment of mpox. in addition, this review identifies knowledge gaps with respect to the virus and the disease, suggests future research directions to address the knowledge gaps, and proposes a one health approach as an effective strategy to prevent current and future epidemics of mpox. introduction monkeypox virus is the etiological agent of a zoonotic disease called monkeypox. it is a double-stranded dna virus belonging to orthopoxvirus genus within the poxviridae family and chordopoxvirinae as the subfamily. other members of this genus include variola virus, cowpox virus, vaccinia virus, camelpox virus, taterapox virus and ectromelia virus. mpxv is divided into clade i and clade ii, with clade ii subclassified as clade iia and iib. for five decades, mpxv was endemic in west and central africa, and exportation of the virus to non-endemic regions was rare. however, the incidence of mpox outside endemic regions has increased, and the epidemiological profile of the disease within endemic regions has changed. this may have led to the mpxv emergence and re-emergence in endemic countries in . this paper will cover the current state of knowledge on the characteristics of mpxv and mpox, the infection biology, molecular pathogenesis, and evolution of mpxv as well as the clinical features, diagnosis, epidemiology, and therapeutic options against mpox. in addition, the review will critically interrogate and evaluate the contributions of viral, host, and anthropogenic factors to the emergence and reemergence of mpox across the globe. before there was no documented report of human mpxv infection, although the virus had previously caused infections in monkeys and apes. infections in monkeys were reported in laboratory/captive animals and were first identified in captive monkeys in denmark in . the first human mpox case emerged in a -month-old boy in the democratic republic of the congo in august . subsequently, six additional mpox cases were identified between september and april in liberia, sierra leone and nigeria. since then, mpxv has been reported in several countries and is endemic in benin, cameroon, the central african republic, the drc, gabon, ivory coast, liberia, nigeria, the republic of the congo, sierra leone, and south sudan. figure displays the global mpox outbreak timeline. between and the cases have been sporadic and geographically limited within endemic regions. notably, the drc is the only country that continuously reports yearly cases of mpox with tropical rainforest regions accounting for .% of all cases pre-. in nigeria, sporadic cases were reported in the 1970s; however, re-emergence of the disease started in with an eleven-year-old boy as the index case in bayelsa state. at the end of nigeria recorded cases, and during this outbreak, travel-related cases in non-endemic countries were reported, including the united kingdom, the united states of america, israel, and singapore, between and . the first mpox outbreak in a non-endemic country was reported in in the usa linked to importation of rodents from ghana. by the end of the outbreak, people had been infected, ). there were no other travel-related cases reported until . between to travel-related mpox cases were recorded in the uk, singapore, israel, and the usa. of these, four resulted in secondary cases: one healthcare worker in the uk was infected by contaminated bedding, an adult and a child from a family from the uk had a travel history to nigeria, and one traveler to israel who had visited nigeria in . between and a total of seven mpox outbreaks occurred outside africa in singapore, the uk and the usa. all travel related cases originated in nigeria, with high-throughput sequencing confirming it as clade ii. between and october a total of cases were recorded in out of states in nigeria, ). the current global mpox outbreak started in may and was declared a public health emergency of international concern on july . as of august there were a total of laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths across countries including countries that have not historically reported mpox. the americas recorded the highest number of cases during the mpox outbreak, with the usa and brazil accounting for .% of the total cases. other notable affected countries include spain, france, colombia, the uk, germany, peru, mexico, and canada. in africa, nigeria has the highest mpox cases with cases. ecology, host range, tissue and cell tropism despite the name, monkeypox, monkeys are not the genuine reservoir of mpxv. several animals can naturally or experimentally be infected with mpxv, but the natural host reservoir remains elusive. while specific host-cell receptors are responsible for cell tropism, the specificity of mpxv is yet to be determined. factors like the monkeypox inhibitor of complement enzymes and complement control protein can influence the viral cellular and tissue tropism. nonetheless, a wide spectrum of tissue and host tropism is expected, which may explain the possibility of mpxv establishing animal reservoirs in non-endemic regions. organs such as ovaries, kidneys, heart, brain, pancreas, liver, and lung have been identified as some of the tissue tropism for mpxv. however, specific virus ligands remain unidentified. the inability to identify specific virus ligands and cognate host receptors for mpxv tropism suggests that the virus uses many alternative ligands to successfully invade host cells or the host receptors have functional redundancy to the virus ligand. spillover to humans might arise from the disruptions of the natural habitats of wild animals. this could occur via various routes, including aerosol, direct contact, and fomite transmission. it is believed that the mpxv outbreaks in africa prior to occurred as a result of a spillover from animals to humans. thus, there is a likelihood of mpxv being sustained in the spillover due to the wide geographical coverage of the mpxv hosts. genomics, phylogenomics, phylodynamics, and evolution mpxv genome and gene content mpxv has a long and complex genome of kbp - kbp with a conserved central region and variable inverted terminal repeats. within mpxv clades, clade i isolates have more uniform genome length than clade ii isolates. the length of mxpv itr varies between .kbp to .kbp. our genomic comparison of mpxv clades indicated similar gene synteny, but slight differences in the gene content among the clades due to some genes that are missing or truncated in either one or two clades. the results are consistent with a previous study which indicates that four genes are missing and three genes are truncated in clade ii. furthermore, the homologue of vacv-cop e5r is only absent in clade i and three genes are truncated. another major difference is the gene content of their left terminal in which clade iia contains four genes that are absent in clade i and iib. however, these four genes are present on the right terminal of all clades. furthermore, clade i and iib have thed2l gene. within clade iib, gene content of the lineage a and b.are similar. phylogenomics and phylodynamics our bayesian phylogenetic analysis of non-recombinant conserved genes from mpxv isolates resolved mpxv into three monophyletic clades, namely clade i, clade iia and clade iib consisting majorly of human mpxv isolated between -. clade iib was further divided into lineages: a, a.a.a.and b.as assigned by the gisaid. mpxv tree topology reported here is similar to that of the trees reported previously. isidro et al. reported that the transition from a./a..to b.is characterized by a long, divergent branch which suggests accelerated microevolution. the findings of this current study agree with the suggestion. lineage a corresponds to the –outbreak, although it contains strains isolated after this time frame and this observation has been reported by others. a recent study showed that new nigerian hmpxv genomes isolated in -were identified as belonging to the lineage a. lineage b.contains most hmpxv genomes from . it is poorly resolved, and its sub-lineages cannot be unequivocally assigned. the low clade supports are probably due to very low genetic variability among isolates. polytomy within lineage b.could be an indication of uncertainty in the relatedness of isolates or the belief that those isolates evolved independently from a single origin, although recombination cannot be excluded. furthermore, molecular dating analysis was carried out on the non-recombinant conserved genes of mpxv isolates to estimate the evolutionary rate and the time of the most recent ancestor. tempest analysis showed temporal signal in the dataset. maximum clade credibility tree demonstrated that mpxv emerged at – ) with a mean evolutionary rate estimated to be .× −with % hpd of .× −− .× −subs/site/year. a recent publication estimated the substitution rate to be x -which is in agreement with our result, but previous estimations of the substitution rates of clades i and iia were smaller. clades i, iia, and iib were estimated to have emerged in and respectively which is earlier by and years as estimated by forni et al.. lineage a and b.were estimated to have a tmrca of and respectively. our dating analysis put the emergence of the b.lineage six years earlier than that estimated by luna et al. and nextclade. this discrepancy may be explained by molecular dating methods used. we hypothesize that the emergence of lineage a about allowed enough time for lineage a evolution and that may explain the long divergent branch length from lineage a to b.. similarly, the emergence of lineage b.in in tandem with clustering of some isolates within the lineage a support cryptic transmission of the b.viruses prior to the current outbreak in multiple non-endemic countries. a recent molecular clock analysis based on accumulation of apobec3 -type mutations inferred that mpxv with apobec3 editing has been in circulation since at least and this is in agreement with our molecular dating reported herein although their interpretation differs from ours. while we infer that b.lineage emerged in o`toole et al. concluded that apobec3-type mutations, a predictor of human-to-human transmission emerged in . the close phylogenetic relationship between a.isolates from nigeria with b.suggests a single origin for lineage b.. mutational analysis and recombination our mutational analysis revealed that lineage b.has -nucleotide substitutions and -amino acid substitutions compared to reference genome nc_063383.mpxv from . consensus substitutions predominantly affect genes responsible for host/immune modulation and viral replication/transcription. b21r codes for a t cell suppressor; our analysis demonstrated that this open reading frame contained three consensus amino acid substitutions. a18r contained three substitutions. excluding g8r with two substitutions, all the other affected orfs contained one consensus amino acid substitution each. the impact of these substitutions on the pathogenicity, transmissibility, immune evasion, and host specificity of mpxv remains unknown. the e353k substitution within f13l affects the target for the antiviral agent, tecovirimat; however, functional studies have not revealed any effect on the efficacy of the drug. wang et al. also reported three mutations in opg210 protein in mpxv outbreak strains. additionally, they showed that this protein together with other nine proteins have more mutations compared to the other mpxv proteins. in contrast to our study, previous mutational studies have reported fewer consensus substitutions. they reported shared mutations in mpxv genomes from outbreak compared with nc_063383. however the number of mutations identified here and in other studies is higher than one would expect for mpxv, based on the low substitution rate of opxv. the accelerated evolution of mpxv has been attributed to the human apobec3. since most mutations identified here and elsewhere were ga>aa and tc>tt mutations, which are compatible with apobec3 activity. apobec3 is a cytidine deaminase known to play important functions in innate anti-viral immunity. evidence for the accumulation of apobec3 enriched substitutions in mpxv isolates has been reported since which corresponds to the detection of lineage a. ever since, every year, there has been an increase in apobec3-like mutations in mpxv. this mutational pattern has become more pronounced as suggested from more recent isolates,. the recent pattern of upsurge of apobec3 derived mutations may be an indication of a change in virus-host interaction such as sustained human-human transmission or a new route of infection. gigante et al. suggested the possibility of recombination in mpxv following observation of three sequences that showed a chimeric pattern in their genomes, although assembly errors could be a plausible explanation. recently, tandem repeats and linkage disequilibrium analysis provided evidence of natural recombination in lineage b.. infection biology and pathophysiology virus morphogenesis, pathogenesis and pathophysiology poxvirus mature particles are ovoid or brick-shaped with surface tubules and have a characteristic dumbbell-shaped nucleoprotein core containing the viral genome. mpxv virions are ~nm in diameter and ~nm in length. like other opxvs, mpxv forms three distinct infectious virus particles: intracellular mature virus, cell associated enveloped virus and extracellular enveloped virus although cev and eev are morphologically and structurally indistinguishable. morphogenesis and transmission of imv, cev, and eev are described in
figure 4a. observations of cynomolgus monkeys infected with mpxv gave the first indications of the pathogenic role of this virus with intramuscular injection of the virus leading to an intense inflammatory immune response. the pathogenesis of mpxv has also been studied in other animals, including rabbits, rodents and prairie dogs. studies in monkeys, mice, and prairie dogs demonstrated that clade i viruses are more virulent than clade ii strains, which reflects the situation in humans. except for disease severity, the clinical features of the two clades are similar. mpxv infection has an incubation period of –days and the most common symptoms for the human mpox outbreak in non-endemic regions based on patients were skin lesions, fever, lymphadenopathy, fatigue/asthenia, myalgia, and headache. regarding skin lesions, anogenital lesions were most frequent, followed by lesions on the trunk/torso, face/head, and extremities. this is in contrast with previous human mpox outbreaks from -where skin lesions were most common on the face and extremities. lymphadenopathy, which typically occurs -days before rash, is a distinct feature of mpxv which is used to distinguish it from smallpox and chickenpox. the morphological progression of the rash is macular, popular, vesicular, and pustular lesions. the crust formed by pustules desquamate after -weeks. in the current outbreak, inguinal lymphadenopathy was more frequent than cervical and axillary lymphadenopathy, whereas in previous outbreaks in endemic countries submandibular, cervical and axillary lymphadenopathy were more frequent. the differences in clinical symptoms between human mpox infections before and the current outbreak are probably the result of different virus strain and patient group. in men having sex with men, atypical clinical symptoms such as genital lesions and anal ulcers were observed. mpxv can enter the host via the oral/respiratory tract, infecting the oral and respiratory tract mucosae, with the upper, middle and lower airway epithelium as main targets for primary infection. mpxv can directly infect damaged skin, and replicate in keratinocytes, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. from the initial infection sites, virus can spread to draining lymph nodes, where the virus can replicate. mpxv can subsequently reach the tonsils, the spleen, and the liver. replication in these organs results in a second viraemia wave, enabling the virus to access distant organs such as the lung, kidneys, intestines, and skin and causing recognizable clinical manifestation. comparison of the clade i and ii strains has provided an indication which viral gene products may be responsible for their difference in virulence. the d14l gene which encodes valosin-containing protein -mpxv, also known as ccp or mopice, is the orthologue of vacv secreted complement c3b/c4b-binding protein vacv-cop c3l. this protein is known to inhibit the complement and to contribute to virulence. compared to the vacv protein, vcp-mpxv/mopice is truncated due to a single nucleotide deletion in the d14l gene leading to a stop codon. the gene is absent from clade ii strains due to ~kbp deletion. deletion of the c3l gene caused vacv attenuation in infected animal models. studies with clade i mpxv with deleted d14l showed that intranasal infection of prairie dogs resulted in decreased morbidity and mortality. however, ablation of d14l did not significantly affect virus replication compared to animals infected with control clade i virus. on the other hand, clade ii virus with inserted d14l gene did not have virulence compared to clade i virus and no apparent effect on disease-associated mortality compared to control clade ii virus was observed. so, other factors besides vcp-mpxv/mopice are necessary to explain the difference in virulence between clade i and ii mpxv. other candidate virulence genes include br-br-and the opxv major histocompatibility complex class i–like protein orthologue. br-protein is an orthologue to the myxoma virus m-t4, which plays a role in avoiding apoptosis of infected lymphocytes, hence promoting viral spread within the host. myxoma virus expressing c-terminal truncated m-t4 caused increased inflammatory response compared to rabbits infected with wildtype virus, whereas challenging with virus lacking m-t4 resulted in disease attenuation. thus, br-may have a dual function in protecting infected lymphocytes from apoptosis and in modulating the inflammatory response to virus infection. the br-gene encodes a aa interleukin-1β binding protein, which prevents il-1β from interacting with the il-receptor. mice intranasally infected with vacv lacking il-1β binding protein developed a more severe illness than wildtype virus. perturbing the il-signaling pathway dampens the innate and acquired immunity, explaining the virulent action of the il-1β binding protein. interestingly, the br-gene of clade i strains has two orfs that can encode a putative n-terminal protein fragment of aa and a c-terminal protein fragment of aa, whereas the clade ii strains encode a putative n-terminal aa polypeptide and a c-terminal aa fragment. it is unknown if any of the fragments function in a way similar to the full-length protein, nor if the differences in the length of the n-terminal fragments of clade i versus clade ii strains of mpxv contribute to the differences in virulence. the omcp gene from clade i strains isolated in the drc carries a bp deletion, which removes the ’region of the n3r gene and the n2r gene. ompc functions as soluble natural killer group member d receptor ligand, possibly representing a strategy to avoid nk-cell-mediated killing. based on the clinical metadata, it was suggested that the deletion is associated with increased human-to-human transmission and pathogenicity compared to clade iia and clade iib isolates. the clade i strain also contains truncated orthologues of vacv-cop e3l and vacv-cop k3l, two proteins that function in interferon resistance. clade i and clade ii genomes differ also in vacv-coph5r, vacv-cop a9l, vacv-cop a50r ), and vacv-cop a36r ). the exact mechanisms by which these proteins may also contribute to differences in pathogenicity between clade i and ii strains remains elusive. signal transduction and pathways manipulation of signaling pathways promotes viral replication and determines disease outcomes, mainly by targeting cell growth and immune responses. mpxv infection suppresses expression of host genes whose products are implicated in regulation of histone expression, cytoskeletal rearrangements, cell cycle progression, ifn-associated genes, and signaling pathways such as the nuclear factor kappa b, the mitogen-activated protein kinase, and metabolic pathways. the nfκb pathway plays pivotal roles in inflammation and immunity. nfκb is typically found as a cytosolic trimer of p65/p50 and the inhibitor protein iκb. phosphorylation of iκb by the trimer ikkα/ikkβ/ikkγ results in the release and activation of p65/p50, which translocate to the nucleus and act as a transcription factor. ankyrin proteins from opxvs can inhibit the nfκb pathway by interfering with different components of this pathway. mpxv genome encodes the ankyrin-like proteins j3l, d1l, d7l, d9l, o1l, c1l, b5r, b17r, n4r, and j1r, but their exact function remains to be determined. in addition, the mpxv bcl2-like proteins a47r, b13r, c6r, and p1l can prevent activation of the nfκb pathway. the mpxv b1r gene encodes the vacv kelch-like protein a55, which inhibits the nfκb pathway and stimulates cd8+ t cell proliferation. however, it remains to be determined whether b1r exerts a similar function. the janus kinase and signal transducer and activator of transcription pathway mediates cellular responses to cytokines and growth factors. h1l inactivates stat1, and c6r blocks stat2. whether the mpxv h1l and d11l orthologues act similarly has not been investigated. the vacv epidermal growth factor homologue vgf usurps the epidermal growth factor receptor pathway to provoke cell proliferation and to stimulate efficient virus spread and pathogenesis. the d3r gene encodes an egf homologue that might activate the egfr pathway and enhance viral dissemination. vacv-cop f11l also promotes viral spreading by inhibiting the rhoa signaling pathway. it is not known whether the mpxv orthologue c17l possesses the same function. circumventing apoptosis is used by viruses to achieve productive replication. vacv f1l and n1l proteins can prevent apoptosis by inhibiting pro-apoptotic proteins bak, bid, bad, and bax. it is unknown whether the mpxv c7l and p1l isologues have similar functions. other mpxv genes that prevent apoptosis include b12r, b19r, d5r, and f3l. b12 is a serine protease and its vacv orthologue b13r has been shown to be a caspase inhibitor. signal transduction is often mediated through a cascade of phosphorylation events. kindrachuk et al. compared the phosphorylation pattern of host cell proteins after clade i or clade ii mpxv infection. they found that clade i mpxv infection down-regulated pathways related to cell proliferation and apoptosis as compared with clade ii mpxv. differences in mpxv-induced posttranslational modification may explain the differences in virulence between mpxv clades. host immune response and virus immune decoy mechanisms host immune response human infection with mpxv is associated with increased levels of ils, c-c motif chemokine ligand and ccl5, and a significant decrease in tumor necrosis factor alpha, ifn-γ, and il-and il-. mpxv infection provokes igm and igg antibodies, long-term persistence of residual igg-memory b cells, and a rapid expansion of activated effector cd4+ and cd8+ t cells followed by a decrease over time. mpxv also interferes with adaptive immune responses of antiviral cd8 + and cd4 + t cell responses via inhibiting t cell receptor-mediated t cell activation. evasion host immune defense because of the high homology between the mpxv genes and the corresponding opxv orthologues, it is assumed and, in some cases, demonstrated that mpxv applies similar strategies to evade the host immune defense system. the toll-like receptor family functions as pattern recognition receptors, which recognize damage-associated molecular patterns such as viral dsrna. binding of viral dsrna to specific tlr members triggers the expression of proinflammatory molecules involved in host anti-viral responses and subsequent activation of the adaptive immune defense system. the vavc a46 protein inhibits the tlr4 signaling pathway. however, it is unknown whether the mpxv orthologue a47 has the same property, but the a47 protein has structural similarities to vacv protein a52r, which can inhibit the tlr3 and tlr4 signaling pathways, underscoring a role for mpxv a47 in interfering with tlr signaling. mpxv produces low levels of dsrna intermediates, but whether these are recognized by tlr3 has not been investigated, although transcriptome analysis of mpxv-infected cells revealed repression of tlr3 target genes. dsrna can also activate kinase r, which mediates phosphorylation of eif2α, resulting in the inhibition of viral and cellular mrna translation. vacv e3 and k3 are inhibitors of pkr, allowing vacv to evade an antiviral response. the n-terminal domain of vacv e3 protein is absolutely required for the interaction with dsrna. mpxv f3 protein is the vacv e3 protein homologue with a aa truncation at the amino terminus, suggesting that mpxv f3 does not bind dsrna. however, mpxv can inhibit host immune responses, although a recombinant vacv expressing the mpxv f3l gene did not inhibit host pkr activation, suggesting that mpxv has evolved to encode for yet undiscovered proteins that compensate for the missing n-terminal amino acids of f3 in limiting host antiviral activities. as previously mentioned, mpxv ccp is completely absent in clade ii isolates, whereas the clade i strains are predicted to express ccp, albeit with a truncated fourth short consensus repeat. loss of expression of ccp/mopice limited the adaptive immune response against mpxv infection in rhesus macaques. ifns are main effectors of the innate immune response and can inhibit virus replication. the mpxv b16 protein is a secreted type i ifn inhibitor and suppresses the antiviral type i ifn-induced signaling pathway. vacv k7 abrogates ifn signaling by destabilizing ifn-regulated factor and inhibits nfκb activation, whereas vacv h1 can block ifn signaling. whether the mpxv d9 and h1 orthologues have the same function remains to be proven, but both proteins are predicted to interact with several cellular proteins of the immune system. vacv e3 perturbs ifn signaling by binding host z-dna binding protein . the mpxv e3 orthologue perturbs the ifn pathway, but whether in a zbp1-dependent manner needs to be established. the dna-sensing receptor pathway cgas/sting can activate the ifn and nfκb pathways. the vacv b16 and b8 proteins block ifn signaling by operating as soluble ifn-α and ifn-γ receptors, respectively. the mpxv orf b16r and b9r encode functional homologues. opxvs encode poxins that degrade ′,′ cgamp and thereby inhibit cgas/sting signaling. poxin is conserved in mpxv where it is fused to an additional c-terminal domain previously noted to have homology with human schlafen proteins, hence mpxv may evade the immune system by targeting the cgas/sting pathway. mpxv can dodge the immune system by targeting the antiviral cytokine tnfα and other immunomodulating molecules. the mpxv-encoded cytokine response-modifying protein b functions as a decoy receptor for tnfα. the c-terminal domain of vacv crmb can bind ccl28, ccl25, cxc motif chemokine ligand cxcl13 and cxcl14. it is unknown whether mpxv crmb interacts with these chemokines, but the amino acid sequence of the corresponding domain in mpxv crmb differs significantly. natural killer cells and cytotoxic t cells play a crucial role in eliminating viral infections. although the number of nk cells expand significantly in peripheral blood and lymph nodes in mpxv-infected rhesus macaques, their migrating capacity was reduced, and several functions such as expression of chemokine receptors and secretion of ifnγ and tnfα were impaired. the importance of nk cells in controlling mpxv viral load was demonstrated in the highly vulnerable to opxv infection cast/eij mouse strain owing to low numbers of nk cells. il-treatment, known to increase the numbers of ifnγ-secreting nk cells and cd8+ t cells, protected cast/eij mice from lethal mpxv infection even when both cd4+ and cd8+ t cells were depleted. this implies that the expanded nk cells were responsible for the protective effect. mpxv protein b10 avoids detection of virus-infected cells by ctl by impairing peptide loading and mhc-i trafficking within the endoplasmic reticulum. however, nk cells continually screen cells via nkg2d for the absence of mhc-i, thereby ensuring that the mhc system is not compromised. mpxv-infected cells with downregulated mhc-i expression overcomes detection by nk cells by secreting the ocmp protein that binds nkg2d and suppress the typical nkg2d-dependent nk cell lysis of cells that do not express mhc-i. il-an ifnγ-inducing factor, stimulates the synthesis of various cytokines and chemokines, regulates th1 and th2 cell responses, and activates nk and ctl. opxvs block il-activities by producing an il-binding protein. the mpxv d6l gene encodes such il-binding protein. the mpxv j3r and a41l genes encode chemokine binding proteins, which are assumed to destroy the chemokine concentration gradient resulting in decreased neutrophil migration in tissues infected with mpxv and thus reducing viral virulence and inflammatory response. the complement system, which forms an essential part of the innate immune system is activated early in mpxv infection in mice, and is crucial for viral control. mpxv mopice which from studies with varv and vacv mopice was found to inhibit activation of the complement pathway. mopice modulates the antiviral immune response as observed by enhanced viral replication in vivo and dampened adaptive immune response in rhesus macaques infected with mpxv lacking mopice expression. because of the absence of the d14l gene in the clade ii, the virus and virus-infected cells would be predicted to be susceptible to the host complement attack. however, the expression of mopice in clade ii did not increase its virulence, demonstrating that mopice is not the sole determinant of differences in viral virulence between the two clades. less is known how mpxv may interfere with the adaptive immune system. mpxv interferes with adaptive immune responses of antiviral cd8 + and cd4 + t cell responses via inhibiting t cell receptor-mediated t cell activation.vacv a35 blocks immune priming of t lymphocytes by interfering with mhc class ii-restricted antigen presentation. moreover, infection studies in cells with mpxv lacking the a35r gene demonstrated that a35 inhibits production of cytokines and chemokines. mpxv a35 analogue, a37, might suppress presentation of viral antigens to immune cells and help the virus to evade the host immune defense system. however, mpxv does not seem to interfere with mhc expression or intracellular transport of mhc molecules. epidemiology demographic and epidemiological characteristics surveillance data on mpox in endemic countries during different periods between -showed that %-% of the disease occurred in children and %-% in males. in contrast, the median age for the -outbreak in nigeria was years, with males accounting for % of the cases. however, for the multi-country outbreak, males accounted for .% of the cases, and the median age was years. in the african region, children accounted for .% of mpox cases compared to <% in europe and the americas. notably, the male-to-female ratio in africa is also markedly lower than in other regions. case fatality rate before the outbreak, the overall pooled estimated case fatality rate was .% and varied by the clade of the virus. the pooled cfr for clade ii was .% and .% for clade i. the outbreak has an estimated cfr of .%. the low cfr in the current outbreak may be related to several factors, including the fact that the clade ii has a cfr of <%, active surveillance, early diagnosis, and treatment. secondary attack rate over the past five decades, the secondary attack rate for mpox has been stable and ranges from % to .%. higher estimates were reported in the outbreak in the drc and nigeria. however, it is imperative to note that it is unclear how the high estimates were obtained and thus may likely be overestimated. virus reproduction number reproduction number is the number of secondary cases anticipated to develop from a single primary case in a naive population. while historical data on r0 is limited, published evidence from drc’s active surveillance between and estimated r0 to be .implying that transmission is ineffective as a human-to-human epidemic is likely to die out. however, early estimations of the r0 in the outbreak in non-endemic countries showed a high variability ranging from .to .with a median of .. this suggests sustained human-to-human transmission, possibly due to several contributing factors, including different social and/or sexual behaviors, different mpxv variants, population density or other unknown causes. while the early estimations indicated sustained transmission, the outbreak has slowed down with case reductions. this could be due to behavior change, infection induced immunity, and vaccinations. risk factors and co-morbidities transmission of mpxv can occur from animal-to-human and from human-to-human. zoonotic transmission usually happens through contact with an infected animal’s bodily fluid or through a bite or scratch. exposure to animal reservoirs, especially in regions with deforestation enhancing animal-human contact, and uncooked meat products are major risk factors for zoonotic transmission. during the usa outbreak, exposure was classified as “non-invasive” or “complex”. patients with complex exposures were more likely to develop systemic illness compared to those with non-invasive exposure. dewitt et al. predicted the mpxv mode of transmission in most studies to be caused by inter-human transmission. large respiratory droplets, bodily fluids, contaminated fomites, and viral shedding through feces are also considered risk factors for viral transmission. airborne transmission of mpxv between animals in experimental settings has also been reported and mpxv was detected in upper respiratory samples, suggesting that interhuman transmission of mpxv via the airborne route may be possible. however, epidemiological observations do not support airborne transmission as the primary route of transmission. the virus can also cross the placenta, suggesting vertical transmission. at least pregnant women have been infected during the outbreak, but vertical transmission was not observed in any case. mpxv has also been detected in human semen, and in archival testes tissue of crab-eating macaque, suggesting potential sexual transmission of the virus. recent outbreak suggests that msm subpopulation may also be at an increased risk. in addition, waning immunity against smallpox has been considered another potential risk factor for the disease. evidence from early outbreaks in the 1980s showed that previous smallpox vaccination provided % protection against mpox. most cases reported were among those born after vaccination ceased in and herd immunity has significantly decreased. evidence from the literature suggests that those who are immunocompromised due to hiv and other underlying conditions are at increased risk of severe mpox disease, 2022b). a high proportion of patients with mpox in the outbreak had concurrent hiv infection and sexually transmitted infections. mpox patients with hiv infection were more likely to be hospitalized than those without hiv infection. however, the evidence on the reason for hospitalization is limited, and it is unknown if it reflects a more severe mpox illness. furthermore, co-infection with other conditions with rashes, such as a varicella-zoster virus, can occur. this herpesvirus causes chickenpox and shingles and is frequently misdiagnosed as mpox in regions where both diseases are endemic. chickenpox is exclusive to humans and more common in younger age groups, and co-infection with mpox has been reported more commonly among children. diagnosis, screening, prevention, and treatment diagnosis and case definitions electron microscopy, immunohistochemical detection of mpxv proteins, and detectable levels of anti-opxv igm antibody during the period of to days after rash onset can be used to diagnose mpxv infection, but all methods are not specific, 2022a). according to the centers for disease control and prevention, 2022a), mpox cases should be confirmed by real-time polymerase chain reaction or next-generation sequencing and isolation of mpxv in culture from a clinical specimen. the f3l, e9l, b6r and j2r genes are all target of qpcr in mpxv diagnosis. the suspected mpox cases are characterized by fulfilling one of the epidemiological criteria, as outlined by cdc, 2022a). surveillance and contact tracing one of the crucial ways of controlling the spread of mpox is contact tracing. individuals exposed to mpxv should be monitored for days checking mpox symptoms, and those with suspected or confirmed mpox cases should be isolated to avoid infecting others. velavan et al. predicted the mpox outbreak would not last provided that cases are well isolated through the contact tracing. although much attention is given to human-human contact tracing, great efforts need to be put into animal-animal and animal-human contact tracing especially due to non-specificity of reservoir hosts for mpxv. surveillance cannot be undermined in curtailing mpox as surveillance would provide more insight into the epidemiology of the disease. in nigeria, the outbreak response management and analysis system for mpox surveillance across portions of states was implemented in november for the mpox outbreak. the use of the system increased the quantity of epidemiological data collected and the communication of aggregate case data. vaccine although there is no specific vaccine for mpxv, the smallpox vaccines have been reported to give % cross-immunity against mpxv due to shared antigenic features. acam2000™ is a replication-competent vaccinia virus vaccine licensed by food and drug administration in august for smallpox prevention, and it is derived from a single clonal viral isolate from dryvax which is a first-generation smallpox vaccine. as a second-generation attenuated vaccinia virus vaccine, acam2000™ has been recommended as mpxv post-exposure prophylaxis. although high level of protection against mpox in animal models has been recorded, the safety of acam2000™ in humans is still of great concern as cardiac complications, and extremely painful and uncomfortable cutaneous reaction at the injection site have been associated with the vaccine. therefore, the vaccine is no longer licensed by european union. jynneos was approved by fda in september for prevention of smallpox and mpox in adults aged >18years. jynneos is the brand name of modified vaccinia virus ankara bavarian nordic vaccine, a non-replicating third-generation attenuated vaccine. jynneos is considered safer than acam2000™. the advisory committee on immunization practices has recommended jynneos as an alternative to acam2000™. nonetheless, both vaccines have been recommended for mpxv high-risk groups. lc16m8 is another potential vaccine for mpxv which is obtained by subjecting vacv lister to serial passages at low temperature in primary rabbit kidney cells. as a third-generation attenuated vaccine, lc16m8 has been shown to be protective against mpxv in animal models with lower neurotoxicity. the frameshift mutation in lc16m8’s major extracellular enveloped virion antigen contributes to the vaccine replication competence and low virulence. presently, lc16m8 is only licensed in japan. antivirals although there are no specific antivirals for mpox, some antivirals have been explored. tecovirimat, -trifluoromethylphenol derivative, was approved by fda in and approved by european medicines agency in january for treatment of smallpox and cowpox. tecovirimat inhibits vp37 protein of vacv by targeting the viral f13l gene and the cpxv homolog v016 gene. vp37, a highly conserved protein in opxv genus, is required for viral maturation and release from the infected cell. inhibition of vp37 prevents viral spread within an infected animal models. goyal etal. recommended tecovirimat to be administered as first line of mpox treatment in pregnant and breastfeeding patients. a tecovirimat analogue has been highlighted as a promising antivirals against opxv infections. cidofovir prodrug is an acyclic nucleoside phosphate that was approved by fda in for the treatment of retinitis in aids patients. the efficacy of cdv has been identified during the in vitro studies in mpxv-infected animals, but the clinical data of cdv efficacy against mpox in human are not available. brincidofovir, a cdv derivative, was approved for smallpox treatment in by fda, and it has lesser toxic effects than cdv. evaluation of cmx001 efficacy and safety in human mpox through the clinical trials is needed. biosafety, biosecurity and bioethics recombination with vaccinia virus and other opxv due to inadequate genome surveillance data particularly in endemic regions, little information about mpxv recombination is available. however, there are some evidences of recombination between coinfecting or superinfecting opxvs both in a laboratory setting and in nature. mpxv circulating in non-endemic regions where other opxvs are endemic, for instance, cpxv in europe and vacv-like in south america, and vaccination against mpox with jynneous or acam are scenarios for coinfection and superinfection between different species of opxv. thus, there remains a potential risk of recombination between mpxv and other opxvs that may result in mpxvs with mosaic genomes and altered biological characteristics. dual use and bioterrorism although there is insufficient evidence of mpxv being used for bioterrorism at the moment, many scientists have expressed concerns over its potential use for bioterrorism because there is a report that there was an attempt by the former soviet union to use mpxv as a bioweapon. the possibility of mpxv as a potential bioweapon due to its global reemergence and its clinical similarities with varv has placed the virus on the global public health agenda. for example, the usa has made preparation for the possibility of smallpox virus as a potential bioterror biological by storing smallpox vaccines and antivirals after the /attack. smallpox virus is in category a of the cdc list of bioterrorism agents. the risk of bioterrorism is heightened knowing that mpxv genomes can be synthesized from publicly available sequence data and life viruses can be re-constituted. this has already been demonstrated with horsepox virus, which shares the same genus as mpxv. hence, a strict dual-use policy must be agreed upon and implemented in all laboratories across the globe. stigmatization and vaccine inequity sexual orientation and racial are two stigmas associated with mpxv. the persistent narrative of the media alongside many scientists linking the mpox outbreak to africa/west africa/nigeria is worrisome. despite the mpox outbreak, which occurred outside africa, the nomenclature and the geographical labels of mpxv strains still reference west african, even though the origin of this outbreak is still unresolved. furthermore, high mpox cases were reported among msm. this narrative portrays these men contracting mpxv because they engaged in sexual intercourse with fellow men, meanwhile the spread of the virus can occur regardless the sex. vaccine inequality affects lower- and middle-income countries. an unknown number of mpox cases in lmics are not captured due to a shortage of resources like limited testing and surveillance capacity. as highlighted by malta et al., the mpxv vaccines are presently accessible only in high-income countries. conclusion mpxv has emerged and re-emerged for over five decades and yet not much is known about its virological profile and the characteristics of the disease it causes. in particular, the reservoir host of mpxv remains unknown, the viral, host and environmental factors that modulate the virus maintenance in the wild, animal-to-animal transmission, zoonotic transmission and reverse spillover are still a mystery. neither are we closer to reliable prognostication of virus emergence and accurate modelling of the disease outcomes. current and future studies should prioritize understanding the molecular basis of mpxv infection to develop effective drugs and vaccines against mpox as well as functional mutational studies that will shed insight into the dynamics of mpxv transmission across hosts. to improve tracking of mpxv, laboratories particularly in resource-poor countries should be equipped with genome-based surveillance capacity and capability. lastly, mpxv and mpox affect human, animal, and ecosystem health. thus, a one health strategy is indispensable to the prevention and treatment of current and future outbreaks. author contributions mo: conceptualization, data curation, investigation, methodology, supervision, writing – original draft, writing – review & editing. ea: formal analysis, investigation, methodology, writing – original draft, writing – review & editing. dk: formal analysis, methodology, writing – original draft. dd: data curation, formal analysis, investigation, writing – original draft. fa: investigation, writing – original draft. oa: formal analysis, investigation, writing – original draft. um: conceptualization, investigation, methodology, writing – original draft, writing – review & editing.
insights into the transmission, host range, genomics, vaccination, and current epidemiology of the monkeypox virus abstract this review delves into the historical context, current epidemiological landscape, genomics, and pathobiology of monkeypox virus. furthermore, it elucidates the present vaccination status and strategies to curb the spread of monkeypox. monkeypox, caused by the orthopoxvirus known as mpxv, is a zoonotic ailment. mpxv can be transmitted from person to person through respiratory droplets during prolonged face-to-face interactions. while many cases of monkeypox are self-limiting, vulnerable groups such as young children, pregnant women, and immunocompromised individuals may experience severe manifestations. diagnosis predominantly relies on clinical presentations, complemented by laboratory techniques like rt-pcr. although treatment is often not required, severe cases necessitate antiviral medications like tecovirimat, cidofovir, and brincidofovir. vaccination, particularly using the smallpox vaccine, has proven instrumental in outbreak control, exhibiting an efficacy of at least % against mpox as evidenced by data from africa. mitigating transmission requires measures like wearing surgical masks, adequately covering skin lesions, and avoiding handling wild animals. . introduction monkeypox, commonly referred to as “mpox,” is a reemerging zoonotic condition characterized by symptoms reminiscent of smallpox in humans and certain animals, caused by the monkeypox virus. the world health organization has recently transitioned to using “mpox” over the traditional term “monkeypox”. mpxv, a double-stranded dna virus, falls within the orthopoxvirus genus of the poxviridae family, sharing this category with other human-pathogenic species such as vaccinia, variola, and cowpox. while the major variola virus, responsible for asian smallpox, boasts a fatality rate between % and %, its attenuated counterpart, variola minor or alastrim, sees rates between % and %. mpxv shares close genetic and clinical ties with the variola virus; however, mpox typically presents milder symptoms than smallpox. in unvaccinated populations, mpox can exhibit fatality rates up to %. research conducted with about cases of mpox in the democratic republic of the congo showed that individuals unvaccinated against smallpox had a .- and .-fold higher chance of contracting mpox in comparison to those vaccinated against smallpox. other studies conducted in the usa and spain similarly demonstrated a higher risk of contracting mpox among unvaccinated individuals compared to those who had received the smallpox vaccine. the virus manifests in two distinct subtypes: clade i and clade ii, previously associated with the geographic domains of the congo basin and west africa, respectively. while both clades can induce significant illness, they often resolve without intervention. the west african clade's mortality rate stands below %, whereas the congo basin variant can escalate to %. mpox poses specific risks to children and can lead to complications like congenital mpox or stillbirth during pregnancy. the disease's nomenclature stems from its discovery, following two outbreaks mimicking pox in research monkeys. the inaugural human mpox case was detected in the democratic republic of congo in . since then, human cases of mpox have been verified in multiple countries, including cameroon, the central african republic, côte d'ivoire, democratic republic of congo, gabon, liberia, nigeria, republic of the congo, and sierra leone. the majority of cases have been reported in the democratic republic of congo. in the us experienced an outbreak of mpox. over the past several decades, there has been a tenfold increase in the number of monkeypox cases. notably, the median age of affected individuals has shifted from young children, approximately years old in the 1970s, to young adults with a median age of years during the period from to . this epidemiological shift might be attributed to the discontinuation of smallpox vaccinations, which historically provided some degree of cross-protection against mpox. despite being identified years ago, mpox has often been overlooked in medical literature, primarily due to its perception as a rare and self-resolving condition. on may an outbreak of mpox was identified, originating from a british individual who contracted the illness during a visit to nigeria, a country where the disease is endemic. by october the disease had spread to over countries, resulting in confirmed cases across nations like australia, the uk, the us, and various european countries. by early september the tally of laboratory-confirmed mpox cases had risen to . cases outside africa have largely been linked to international travel or the importation of animals. the cdc indicates that while the primary reservoir of the mpox virus remains unidentified, it is believed that african rodents and certain nonhuman primates, such as monkeys, might transmit the virus to humans. the escalating number of individuals affected by mpxv necessitates an in-depth examination. this review aims to shed light on the multifaceted dimensions of the recent mpox surge. it provides an updated account of the history and present state of the mpxv disease, delving into its modes of transmission, current epidemiological landscape, and pathobiology, with a particular focus on the virus's genomic makeup. moreover, this study presents an overview of the antiviral medications and vaccines available for the treatment and containment of mpxv infections. . history in the renowned danish virologist preben von magnus, recognized for his contributions to polio vaccines, influenza, and mpox research, identified mpox in cynomolgus monkeys within a danish laboratory setting. this discovery followed two outbreaks resembling smallpox in monkey colonies, originally from malaysia, which were later transported to singapore. by another mpox outbreak was noted at the rotterdam zoo, and soon after, instances of the disease were identified in laboratory monkeys within the us. after incidents of mpox in laboratory monkeys declined, attributed to enhanced living conditions for the animals and a reduced demand for monkeys from asia and africa, primarily used in polio vaccine production. the presence of the virus in asian monkeys, despite the virus not being native to asia, likely resulted from contamination or infections acquired during captivity or transit. historically, mpox was often misdiagnosed as smallpox, chickenpox, shingles, and herpes. however, as the severity and outbreak potential of mpox became evident, accurate diagnosis grew in importance. the inaugural documented human case of mpox appeared in afflicting an unvaccinated infant, just nine months old, in the équateur province of the democratic republic of the congo. intriguingly, this occurrence was post the eradication of smallpox in the region in . since the initial identification of monkeypox, the majority of human cases have predominantly originated from the rural rainforest regions of the congo basin, especially in the democratic republic of congo. the disease has been documented across central and west africa. from onwards, mpox cases have emerged in african countries, including benin, cameroon, democratic republic of congo, central african republic, gabon, côte d'ivoire, liberia, sierra leone, nigeria, republic of congo, and south sudan. during the decade from to approximately cases were reported, with the democratic republic of congo accounting for over two-thirds of these instances. other countries, such as liberia, sierra leone, the ivory coast, and nigeria, also reported cases during this period. subsequently, since over human cases have been recorded. it is noteworthy that in tropical central and west africa, sporadic viral outbreaks often occur, characterized by a % mortality rate and a % rate of secondary human-to-human transmission. the most significant mpox outbreak was observed between february and february in these regions. outside africa, the first significant outbreak in the us occurred in . this outbreak was linked to human contact with infected pet prairie dogs, which were housed with gambian pouched rats and dormice imported from ghana. following an outbreak, over instances of monkeypox were recorded in the us. subsequent cases of mpox were identified in travelers from nigeria to various countries: israel in september singapore in may the uk in december and the us in july and november as well as may and may . remarkably, in may mpox cases emerged in several countries where the disease was previously nonendemic. the world health organization data indicate that from january to september mpox was reported across countries/territories/areas, with a total of laboratory-confirmed cases. tragically, of these cases resulted in fatalities attributed to mpxv. . transmission, host, and zoonosis the specified method by which mpxv spreads to humans is unknown. however, when handling mpxv-infected animals, primary animal-to-human infection is thought to happen. animal-to-human transmission may occur through direct or indirect contact with the blood, body fluids, cutaneous lesions, or mucosal lesions of infected animals. the virus enters the body through skin breaks, some of which are not apparent, as well as the eyes, mouth, nose, and other regions of the respiratory tract. although mpxv's reservoir host is unknown, african rodents are thought to be involved in transmission. many african animals are infected with the mpxv, including tree squirrels, gambian pouched rats, rope squirrels, dormice, and monkey species. eating undercooked meat and other animal-derived products from diseased animals can be a possible risk factor. people living in or close to forested areas may be indirectly or minimally exposed to infected animals. the mpox outbreak in in the us began when prairie dogs in a pet shop were presumed to have been infected with the mpxv by a large gambian rat native to africa. the disease then spread through pet prairie dogs, infecting people. also, secondary or human-to-human transmission is considered common. although human-to-human transmission is common, prior mpox outbreaks remained small and self-limiting because many people in the past have had some immunity from the late 20th-century smallpox mass vaccination programs. once the at-risk population developed immunity and local herd immunity was attained, the outbreak swiftly ended. the prevalence of mpox cases in may and june points to new transmission clusters from big gatherings, such as raves and festivals. human-to-human transmission can happen when people come into close contact with infected persons' skin sores, respiratory secretions, or recently contaminated objects. also, it can be transferred by touching a mpox-infected patient's clothing, bedding, or towels and through coughs and sneezes. large respiratory droplets are assumed to be the primary method of human-to-human transmission. and after transmission from infected animals or humans, mpox infection begins with dermal or respiratory epithelial infection. recently, prolonged mpox dna shedding from the upper respiratory tract following skin lesion resolution has been observed. therefore, there is a risk of mpox infection for those who are in close proximity to the patient during an aerosol-generating procedure and are not using a surgical face mask or respirator. long-term face-to-face contact is required since respiratory droplets can only travel a few feet. however, in the past few years, the number of person-to-person infections in the longest-known chain of transmission in a community increased from six to nine, which could be related to the loss of immunity in all groups due to the end of smallpox vaccination. also, transmission can happen by the placenta from the mother to the fetus or between and after birth through intimate contact. there have also been reports of transmission through tattoos, piercings, and sharp instruments. paul hunter, a professor of medicine at the university of east anglia's norwich school of medicine, said that “transmission of monkeypox seems to be almost exclusively being transmitted by close and intimate contact. so, people should avoid contact with people who could be infected, especially if they have a rash. also, the outbreak in the democratic republic of congo showed that the virus circulated quickly through households. the mpox is generally not a sexually transmitted disease, yet it can be transferred by direct touch during sex. the msm community is most affected by the current mpox outbreak, which does not indicate that we are dealing with a new mpox strain that only affects men or is sexually transmitted between men. world health organization also stated that everyone with intimate contact with an infectious person is at risk of contracting mpox. recently, in the enzootic areas, mpox was detected in teenagers too. and according to who, serious mpox cases were found in children and are correlated with the level of virus interaction. this outbreak was the first documented occurrence of mpox community transmission outside of africa and the first known case of transmission between men who have sex with men. before the outbreak in mpox was not considered an std. the virus's rapid spread between sexual partners in the initial stages of the outbreak led to speculation that sexual intercourse could be a different mode of transmission. according to epidemiologist david heymann, mpox was likely to spread sexually among msm in two waves in spain and belgium in which started the european outbreak. additionally, the cdc reevaluated recent outbreaks for potential transmissions, including kissing, hugging, oral, anal, and vaginal sex. these transmissions may be connected to genetic modifications facilitating the mpxv's human-to-human transmission. the primary risk factors for monkeypox virus transmission are summarized in table . . genomics the monkeypox virus belongs to the poxviridae family, the chordopoxvirinae subfamily, and the orthopoxvirus genus. the mpxv seems huge under electron microscopy. poxviruses are brick-shaped, and a lipoprotein envelope surrounds their linear double-stranded dna genome. poxviruses have all the necessary assembly, replication, transcription, and egress proteins in their genome despite their mrna translation's dependency on host ribosomes. mpxv, cowpox virus, variola virus, and vaccinia virus are among the many viruses in the poxviridae family, orthopoxvirus genus that have been observed to infect humans. although genetically and antigenically similar, orthopoxviruses vary in host range and pathogenicity features. according to comparative genomics studies, orthopoxvirus evolution is proceeding and can be influenced by a host species' selection pressure. it has been suggested that the evolution of these viruses was driven by progressive gene loss, particularly toward the ends of the genome. mpxv has a kb linear dna genome with nonoverlapping orfs greater than nt. like all orthopoxviruses, mpxv's main coding region sequence at nucleotide positions –is highly conserved and surrounded by varying ends and inverted terminal repeats. most vacv homologs of genes discovered in the mpxv genome's terminal ends are engaged in immunomodulation, and the majority are expected or confirmed to impact pathogenicity and host range determination. in the itr region of mpxv, there are at least four orfs. mpxv strain evolution is influenced by genomic instability and genetic polymorphism. although host transition models predict genomic alterations, the relationship between gene loss and secondary transmission raises the possibility that it is evolving for effective replication in a novel ecological niche: humans. increased human-to-human transmission and the frequency of variation introduction could also be explained by some factors, such as vaccination status and human encroachment on reservoir habitats, linking omcp gene loss and transmissibility coincidentally. the virus is divided into two genetic clades: clade i and clade ii. observing the genomic sequences of mpxv, derived from congo basin and west african strains, revealed % identity with geographical areas and % identity with geographical clusters. the genetic sequence of the mpox virus from an infected portuguese man was identified in the current investigation. on may a swab sample was taken from the patient's skin lesions. according to phylogenetic analyses, the sequence belonged to the west african clade. it was observed that the virus was the most closely connected to viruses linked to past nigerian exports to other nations in and . the reference sequence is approximately percent of the length of the draft sequence. however, according to who, no record exists that the mpxv has mutated. a single nucleotide variation was found between mpxv-usa--and mpxv-usa--viruses, originating from a similar source. a group of closely related, large, enclosed dna viruses called poxviruses only replicate inside the cytoplasm of vertebrate or invertebrate cells. the orthopoxvirus genus, part of the poxviridae family, contains numerous zoonotic viruses, including variola, vaccinia, cowpox, and mpox. the replication cycle of poxviruses provides information about how the mpox virus reproduces. poxviruses primarily rely on virus-encoded proteins to replicate in the cytoplasm. the linear, double-stranded genome and the virus-encoded proteins and enzymes that enable transcription of the initial set of genes are located in the infectious poxvirus's membrane-bound particle's core. initial mrna and protein synthesis is followed by dna replication. the late and intermediate classes of mrna can be produced using the duplicated dna as a template. according to the most recent findings, there are only early, intermediate, and late genes in the poxvirus. the viral assembly process follows late gene expression, termed mature virions, the earliest infectious form. an extracellular virion is also released when the outer and plasma membranes merge. no matter the mechanism or whether the ev or mv drives infection, the fusion relies on -nonglycosylated transmembrane proteins with sizes varying between and kda linked together in a complex. evs have a loose outer membrane and are specialized for leaving the intact cell and spreading inside the host, while mvs have a relatively stable outer membrane. they are hypothesized to facilitate transmission among host animals. virostealth and virotransducer proteins are intracellular proteins. poxvirus proteins have virostealth and virotransducer activity. virotransducer proteins, especially those involved in oxidative bursts and apoptotic pathways, inhibit the cell's response to the specific infection. downregulating the immune recognition molecules, like the mhc and cd4+ by the virostealth proteins, which have intracellular functions, lowers the host's immune system to detect viruses. respiratory and other rna viruses can escape the host's innate immune defense system. extracellular viromimic proteins fall into two categories, and both could regulate how the immune system reacts. some viromimic proteins act extracellularly and regulate immune responses. the host cytokines and chemokines are competitively bound by the baroreceptors, which are produced or present on the cell surface and inhibit the function of the host's cytokines and chemokines. therefore, virokines create viral mimics of host growth factors, cytokines, and chemokines that efficiently abolish host immune responses against viral survival and promote viral replication and dissemination. these modulatory proteins cooperate to circumvent and evade the host immune system. . pathobiology human mpox has a pathogenesis similar to smallpox, except that small skin lesions or oral mucous membranes are the most common routes for viral introduction from a wildlife source. in extremely rare cases of person-to-person transmission, viruses can also enter through the respiratory tract. the mpxv replicates in lymphoid tissue the same way as the smallpox virus but results in greater lymphadenopathy. the virus first expresses itself in mononuclear phagocytic cells and then spreads via the bloodstream before reappearing in the skin cells. the current incubation period of mpox is up to days, with a mean incubation period of .days. in contrast, data from historical mpox outbreaks suggest the normal incubation period for a virus is to days, with a maximum of days. the mpox is caused by an infection of the dermis following transmission from an infected animal or an infection of the respiratory epithelium following transmission from an infected person. the mpxv reproduces at the inoculation site after entering via any route, e.g., oropharynx, nasopharynx, or intradermal, and the viral entry is facilitated by the cell membrane fusion, micropinocytosis, and viral endocytosis processes. mpxv travels to the blood, local lymph nodes, tonsils, and other organs. primary viremia and systemic infection ensue from the virus's spread through the lymphatic system. symptom onset is linked to secondary viremia, which causes prodromal symptoms, including fever and lymphadenopathy, for one to two days before lesions emerge. at this time, infected patients may spread the virus. the lesions begin from the oropharynx and progress to the skin. around the time lesions appear, serum antibodies are frequently found. the second viremia causes epithelial infection, resulting in skin and mucosal sores. like other poxviruses, mpox has developed methods to avoid host immune responses. fever, weariness, headache, myalgia, and lymphadenopathy are the initial signs of mpox, distinguishing it from smallpox. the genital area might be an initial infection site for causing rash before progressing to subsequent lesions. recent data showed that, in % of the mpox cases, lesions appear on the face. and in % of the confirmed cases, the palms, soles, and oral mucous membranes are affected. however, for genitalia and conjunctivae, it is % and %, respectively. mucosal lesions in the mouth emerge to days later, followed by skin lesions on the face and extremities, which are centrifugally condensed. the rash may or may not transmit to other body parts, and the lesions can range from a few to thousands of numbers. the lesions progress via vesicular, macular, papular, and pustular phases during the next two to four weeks in one- to two-day increments. lesions are hard, deep-seated, to mm in size, and alter synchronously. before crusts form, lesions are in the pustular phase for five to seven days. crusts develop and desquamate within the next seven to fourteen days, and the condition often cures three to four weeks from the symptom onset. after all the crusts have fallen away, the patient is no longer regarded as contagious. . current epidemiology between and cases were documented in zaire at the time of initial human identification. the average fatality rate in unvaccinated cases was %, with higher rates in children, while no mortality was found in patients who had received vaccinations. after the mpox outbreak in the us in the first case of mpox this year in a nonendemic country was confirmed on may . a british person who had visited lagos and delta states in nigeria, where mpox is regarded as an endemic disease, reported a case of mpox in early may . on april while in nigeria, the person acquired a rash and traveled back to the uk, arriving on may and presenting to the hospital that day. the mpox was suspected quickly; thus, the patient was admitted to a hospital and isolated before testing positive for mpxv on may . the uk health security agency reported two new cases of mpox on may both in london. the ukhsa confirmed four more cases of mpox on may in londoners and one individual from north east england. on the same day, the uk health secretary sajid javid announced that other cases had been confirmed, which brings the total number of patients in the country to twenty. through the second part of may new cases in numerous countries beyond the endemic region were recorded. portugal reported cases of mpox on may . till may there were seven cases confirmed in spain. the us verified its first case of mpox in on the same day, while canada reported thirteen suspected cases. on may sweden, belgium, and italy confirmed their first cases. france, australia, germany, and the netherlands verified their first cases on may . several european countries, as well as israel, verified their first cases in may. mexico and the united arab emirates confirmed their first cases. dr. sue hopkins, the uk health security agency's top medical advisor, reported on may that new mpox cases had been verified, bringing the total number of confirmed cases in the uk to . beginning on may cases started to be reported from an increasing number of countries and areas, especially europe, north and south america, north africa, asia, and australia. following the international health regulations, laboratory-confirmed cases had been notified to who by nonendemic nations in four who regions as of june . by october confirmed mpox cases had increased to and the total number of deaths was . between august and october hospitalized patients with severe mpox symptoms received clinical consultation from the centers for disease control and prevention. following the “mpox outbreak” released by who on january mpox cases were reported in countries. as of january there were confirmed cases; the us had the most cases with . since then, fatalities have been reported worldwide; the top nations are the us, brazil, peru, nigeria, mexico, ghana, spain, and cameroon. the who's most recent updates indicate that the global risk of mpox is moderate. regarding geographic distribution, the risk is highest in the americas and moderate in africa, the eastern mediterranean, europe, and southeast asia. from july to august new cases were reported from the united states of america, europe, and the western pacific. that means a .% increase is seen in total cases of mpox. also, three new deaths were reported, all in the usa. as of 11th september among the cases with available data, .% were males. the median age of these cases was years, with an interquartile range of to years. notably, the age and sex distributions of the cases have remained consistent over time. . monkeypox in immunocompromised patients immunocompromised individuals, including those undergoing cancer treatments, organ transplants, or afflicted with autoimmune disorders, are particularly susceptible to severe manifestations of the mpxv. a cdc study illustrated the graveness of this issue, showing that a significant number of hospitalized patients with mpxv were immunocompromised. these patients presented with extensive skin lesions, and a concerning % who were treated in intensive care units succumbed to the disease. the severity of mpxv in these individuals is further highlighted by two case reports: one of a patient undergoing chemotherapy for hodgkin's lymphoma and the other a kidney transplant recipient. both patients presented with severe symptoms, though the lymphoma patient experienced a more aggressive disease progression. despite over globally diagnosed cases of mpxv, there is a notable absence of data from randomized controlled trials on antiviral treatments. mpxv in immunocompromised patients often presents with extensive rashes, possible secondary infections, and complications like respiratory issues and organ dysfunction. these severe manifestations emphasize the need for more comprehensive research and targeted treatment approaches for this vulnerable population. . vaccination mpxv infection is usually mild; most infected people recover for a few weeks without therapy. a recent study demonstrated that vaccination did not lead to a reversal in the occurrence of mpox. different countries are already utilizing vaccines to manage mpox outbreaks. currently, there are three smallpox vaccinations in the strategic national stockpile of the us: the apsv or aventis pasteur smallpox vaccine could be used to treat smallpox as part of an investigational new drug protocol, along with jynneostm and acam2000®, which are licensed for smallpox. the jynneostm was accepted by the us food and drug administration in september and is now suggested for preventing smallpox and mpox diseases for persons of years or older who have been shown to have a high risk for smallpox or mpox infection. jynneos, a replication-deficient mva vaccine, protects adults from developing smallpox or mpox. according to historical statistics, smallpox vaccination with the vaccinia virus was around % effective against the mpxv. the cdc has an emergency access ind protocol that allows the use of acam2000® during an outbreak for infections caused by nonvariola orthopoxviruses. it was accepted by the fda in august and replaced the earlier orthopoxvirus vaccine, the dryvax®. between jynneostm and acam2000®, there are several distinctions. acam2000® is a vaccinia virus capable of reproduction, whereas jynneostm is a modified vaccinia ankara virus incapable of replication. because of this, acam2000®, but not jynneostm, causes a significant cutaneous reaction at the inoculation site. as a result, using acam2000® carries a danger of accidental inoculation and autoinoculation. however, using jynneostm has no such risk. by contrasting immunologic reactions and “take” rates between acam2000® and dryvax, the fda evaluated the efficacy of acam2000®. similarly, the fda evaluated the effectiveness of jynneostm by contrasting its immunologic response to that of acam2000® and considering supportive animal research. avoiding acam2000® in populations is legitimate because recommendations state that immunosuppressed people should not use it. additionally, the unintentional transmission that results in fetal vaccinia can be lethal to the fetus or baby and can happen when using replication-competent vaccines. other severe adverse reactions found more commonly with acam2000® than with jynneostm are post-vaccination encephalitis and myopericarditis, which are estimated to affect .per main acam2000® vaccine recipients. when approved vaccinations are unavailable or inappropriate, the replication-competent vaccinia vaccine, apsv, may be used under emergency use authorization or an ind. bavarian nordic vaccines are considered safe for at-risk categories since they are made of a modified type of the vaccinia virus. an emerging approach to control the spread of infectious diseases like mpox is the ring vaccination strategy. this involves vaccinating immediate contacts of a confirmed infected individual, forming a protective “ring” of immunity around the infected person to break the chain of transmission. this strategy has been particularly effective in isolated communities, ensuring efficient resource utilization and limiting the spread of the disease. however, challenges arise in tracing and vaccinating certain contacts, especially in societies where there's stigma attached to behaviors such as msm. this makes the tracing of these cases and their contacts potentially difficult, jeopardizing the effectiveness of the ring vaccination strategy. additionally, logistical barriers in some regions and public hesitancy towards vaccination, due to potential rare adverse events, further underscore the need for comprehensive public awareness campaigns. it is difficult to say whether giving the vaccination after someone has been exposed to mpox can entirely protect them because it takes between five and twenty-one days for someone who comes into close contact with an infected individual to display signs of mpox and most often, seven to fourteen days. studies indicate the acceptance of mpox vaccine's prevalence of .% among healthcare workers, with .% demonstrating vaccine refusal. geographic disparities exist with asian and african regions showing higher acceptance compared to north america and europe. acceptance is notably high among physicians alone. higher acceptance in asian and african regions may stem from factors like greater mpox knowledge within china due to government outreach and potentially poorer understanding within the us compared to china. a similar geographic pattern existed for covid-vaccine acceptance, suggesting a broader trend. cultural, religious, and local factors, coupled with rampant misinformation, all contribute to vaccine hesitancy, as seen with the covid-pandemic. continuous monitoring and strategies to combat misinformation are crucial for improving vaccination rates. . antiviral drugs various drugs could be used to treat mpox. one such medicine is tecovirimat, which works by interfering with a protein located on the surface of orthopoxviruses to inhibit infection from spreading. another antiviral that could be used is cidofovir, an injectable medicine approved in the uk to treat a deadly viral eye infection in people with aids. cidofovir is transformed into the antiviral component cidofovir diphosphate in the body. cidofovir prevents smallpox in the lab; it could be approved for use in smallpox or mpox outbreaks in the future. however, cidofovir is a powerful drug that might harm the kidneys; a better choice would be brincidofovir, a similarly related drug approved in the us to treat smallpox. in humans, brincidofovir has been evaluated for various viral infections. laboratory investigation proving that it acts against orthopoxviruses led to its approval for treatment in smallpox in the us. as a result, brincidofovir is also included as a possible treatment for mpox. however, data on cidofovir, brincidofovir, and tecovirimat in treating human mpox infections must be included. . approaches for prevention and control while health experts believe that the concerns for the general population are low, the united kingdom's national health service, the united states centers for disease control and prevention, and the world health organization all recommend taking certain actions to limit the risks of catching the virus. when feasible, anyone with large lesions that cannot be covered easily, respiratory symptoms, or draining or weeping lesions should be separated in a room away from others in the family and pets. the mpox patients should stay home until they visit the doctor for follow-up care. visitors must have compelling reasons to visit the doctor. members of the household who are not sick should avoid contact with the monkeypox patient. animals, especially pets, should be avoided by those with monkeypox. pets should be cared for by other household members whenever possible. patients with respiratory symptoms should wear a surgical mask. if not possible, other family members should wear a surgical mask near the monkeypox patient. disposable gloves should be worn for direct contact with lesions and discarded after that. cover up skin lesions as much as possible to reduce the danger of contact with infected persons. after contact with lesion material, clothes, environmental surfaces, or linens that may have come in contact with a lesion, sick people and household contacts should disinfect their hands with soap or use an alcohol-based sanitizer. laundry can be cleaned using warm water and soap in a regular washing machine; bleach can be added but is not required. soiled laundry should be handled in any way that does not cause infectious particles to disperse. the sick person does not need to use separate utensils if thoroughly washed. the utensils should be washed using warm water. surfaces that have been contaminated should be cleaned using some good quality disinfectants. it is common for healthcare workers to come into contact with patients who have mpox. not only mpox lesions be present in nontypical ways but also misidentifying them raises the possibility of professional encounters without the appropriate personal protective equipment. also, exposed healthcare personnel should be kept under active supervision for days to cover the incubation period. additionally, outpatient settings should be offered in high-risk mpox transmission areas with suitable ppe, gloves, fluid-repellent surgical facemasks, eye protection, and ffp3 respirators for personnel. interestingly, postexposure vaccinations with the existing variola vaccines can be given to the exposed person. it should be given within four days to fourteen days after exposure. moreover, all healthcare personnel should get a proper idea of mpox and its symptoms through emergency training courses to increase their understanding and attitude toward mpox outbreak response and prevention. . conclusions the re-emergence of monkeypox underscores a critical concern for global health, potentially heralding the onset of a future pandemic. contemporary evidence suggests that a decline in human immunity may have set the stage for the resurgence of this virus. recent detections of mpxv cases beyond africa accentuate the potential for its geographical spread and underline the global implications of this disease. it is imperative that public health communities recognize the escalating risk posed by mpox and prioritize efforts to mitigate its spread. healthcare practitioners attending to affected patients must exercise meticulous caution to curtail human-to-human transmission. the exigent need of the hour is the rapid development and deployment of mpxv-specific antiviral agents and vaccines. initiating vaccination campaigns in regions with confirmed mpxv presence, particularly africa, is paramount. additionally, substantial international funding should be mobilized to bolster case detection and surveillance efforts globally. to navigate the evolving landscape of mpox epidemiology, rigorous research endeavors are essential. comprehensive understanding and awareness are our foremost tools in preempting and managing potential mpxv outbreaks. collaborative efforts, spearheaded by organizations like who and augmented by the influential reach of social media, can amplify global awareness. by harnessing informed strategies and fostering international collaboration, we can proactively counteract the looming threat of a mpxv-induced pandemic.
mpox and lessons learned in the light of the recent outbreak: a narrative review abstract according to the who, more than cases of mpox have been reported since the worldwide outbreak, which resulted in deaths, while a new outbreak in africa since has resulted in over cases and deaths. mpox is a zoonosis caused by the monkeypox virus, a double-stranded dna virus belonging to the orthopoxvirus genus, which causes smallpox-like illness. until cases were predominately located in west and central africa, with only sporadic cases and outbreaks reported in other parts of the world. during the outbreak, the primary mode of transmission was sexual contact among men who have sex with men. the changing epidemiology of mpox resulted in new disease phenotypes and populations at risk, disproportionally affecting people who live with hiv. commonly presenting as a mild, self-limiting illness, mpox can cause severe and protracted disease in people with hiv with a cd4 count < cell/mm3. the global emergence of mpox that followed and intersected with covid-mobilized the scientific community and healthcare stakeholders to provide accurate diagnostics, preventive vaccines and treatment to those most affected. despite existing gaps, this rapid response helped to contain the outbreak, but challenges remain as new variants emerge. preparedness and readiness to respond to the next outbreak is crucial in order to minimize the impact to the most vulnerable. . introduction the worldwide outbreak of mpox in brought this previously neglected disease into the spotlight. endemic in west and central africa for decades, mpox emerged, for reasons not yet quite understood, in the aftermath of the covid-pandemic, but it also intercepted with the hiv epidemic, disproportionately affecting people living with hiv and men who have sex with men. the reflexes of the scientific community and health policymakers were immediate as they swiftly mobilized resources and implemented measures to address the situation. the preceding covid-pandemic had laid the groundwork for the rapid recognition and surveillance of the mpox epidemic as well as vaccine production and delivery, public communication and the implementation of preventive strategies to contain the disease. the already-established networks of sexual health/hiv services and community stakeholders took on the task of informing the populations most at risk and implementing prevention, testing and treatment protocols. this review outlines the origins and virology of the monkeypox virus as well as its clinical presentation, diagnosis and treatment. it also lays out the available preventive measures, with a focus on vaccination, and discusses the preparedness of global and community leaders to effectively respond to this outbreak as the world anticipates the next one. . taxonomy and virology mpxv is an enveloped double-stranded dna virus belonging to the poxviridae family of the genus orthopoxvirus and is closely related to vaccinia virus, the cause of smallpox. the name of the virus originates from its discovery in in copenhagen in laboratory cynomolgus monkeys presenting smallpox-like disease. although the primary host of the virus is still elusive, various african rodents have been reported to be potential reservoirs, whereas apes and monkeys are considered to be intermediate hosts. after the outbreak, a nomenclature change was suggested to destigmatize the disease, resulting in the adoption of the name mpox for the disease caused by mpxv by the world health organization. a consensus was also reached to rename the two viral clades, previously known as congo basin and west african, to clades i and ii, respectively. furthermore, two subclades of clade ii were recognized, with clade iib referring to the virus that caused the outbreak. more recently, an offset of clade i was identified, named clade ib, that caused an outbreak with sustained human-to-human transmission in the democratic republic of the congo. poxviruses are characterized by their cytoplasmatic replication, in contrast to other dna viruses whose reproduction takes place inside the cell nucleus. moreover, they are among the largest viruses, with mpxv reaching a length of –nm and having a brick-like shape. the core of the mature virion contains kb long linear dsdna and core fibrils, and it is surrounded by the core membrane and a palisade layer that gives the core its characteristic biconcave shape. two lateral bodies are located between the core and the outer membrane, while spontaneously released virions are also surrounded by a lipoprotein envelope. due to their large size, poxviruses are easily detected by host immune defenses and have a more prolonged replication cycle in comparison with smaller viruses. therefore, they employ elaborate strategies to survive in the host cell, producing molecules that disrupt the host’s defenses, both within the cell and extracellularly. intracellular virulence factors include virotransducer and virostealth proteins, which act by dampening the cell’s response to infection and by reducing the detection of the infected cell by the immune system, respectively. on the other hand, viromimic proteins act in the extracellular space and include viroreceptors and virokines. viroreceptors bind and virokines mimic chemokines and cytokines secreted by the host, consequently evading their antiviral action and promoting viral survival and replication. despite the abundance of these virulence factors in all poxviruses, each virus exhibits its own set of immune-evasion tactics, resulting in pathogenic differences, even within the same species. for example, clade i mpxv expresses a complement-binding protein that interferes with complement activation, which is absent from clade ii mpxv. this may partly explain the higher fatality rate of mpox in central africa, where clade i is prevalent, and the relatively more benign disease during the epidemic caused by the clade iib variant. moreover, facilitated human-to-human transmission of both the clade iib and ib mpxv has been proposed to result from noncanonical viral evolution driven by the accumulation of characteristic mutations associated with the action of the apolipoprotein b messenger rna editing enzyme catalytic polypeptide . apobec3 enzymes belong to the cytidine deaminase family, introduce g → a mutations to the complementary dna and demonstrate antiviral properties. experimentally, human apobec3f has been found to cause hypermutations in the mpxv genome, which may have driven the viral evolution that has been seen to contribute to the recent epidemics. . origin and epidemiology .. west and central africa after its first appearance in mpxv outbreaks in imported captive primates were recorded in the us and the netherlands for the next years, yet no human case was recorded. in the first case of mpox in humans was reported in a -month-old child from the drc, who presented with smallpox-like disease. since then, several west and central african countries have reported sporadic cases and self-contained outbreaks related to animal contact, with limited human-to-human transmission. in the period –the drc recorded a more serious outbreak with more sustained human-to-human transmission. as the universal variola vaccination, which was % effective in preventing mpox, was halted after the success of the smallpox eradication programme in population immunity gradually waned. the first outbreak outside africa was recorded in the usa in and originated from prairie dogs, which in turn had been infected by imported rodents from ghana. during this outbreak, mpxv clade ii caused confirmed or suspected cases, with no proven human-to-human transmission or fatalities being reported. in the meantime, mpox remained endemic in the drc, with cases also recorded in other countries in west and central africa. surveillance of the disease showed a steadily increased incidence between and continuing through . in early a systematic review showed that published cases almost doubled between and and and with the majority of cases reportedly being caused by clade i. in after years of no reported cases, nigeria reported its first outbreak of clade ii mpox, which was the source of the first exported human cases outside africa that were recorded in the united kingdom, israel and singapore. this outbreak was characterized by sustained human-to-human transmission, while the epidemiological data suggested sexual contact to be among the possible modes of transmission. this outbreak was caused by the clade iib virus that eventually gave rise to the mpxv lineage b.the cause of the global outbreak. .. global outbreak in early may the who reported the first cases of mpox in the united kingdom that were not related to travel to endemic countries, raising concern for community spread, and by mid-may cases were reported in countries. gradually, more countries started to report cases in all six who regions. on july the who director-general declared this outbreak as a public health emergency of international concern. as of february nearly cases of mpox have been recorded in more than countries not endemic for mpxv, resulting in deaths. the worldwide epidemic disproportionately affected msm, while intimate sexual contact was the main route of transmission. the epidemic reached its peak in august and, despite cases being on the decline since then, low levels of transmission are still reported. this outbreak, caused by a new mpxv lineage, marked a significant change in mpox epidemiology, risk factors and clinical presentation and raised awareness of a previously neglected disease. the pheic was declared to be over in may after there had been a sustained decline in global cases. .. –outbreak as early as september an epidemic of a new variant of clade i mpxv, called clade 1b, began in central africa. the africa centres for disease control and prevention reported an increase of approximately % from the previous year. during over mpox cases due to mpxv clade i and clade ii have been reported from african union member states, including over confirmed cases, in burundi, cameroon, central african republic, republic of the congo, côte d’ivoire, drc, ghana, liberia, kenya, nigeria, rwanda, south africa and uganda. in drc, most cases and deaths reported were among those < years of age, representing % of the total cases and % of the total deaths. males accounted for % of the cases in drc. in congo, based on information provided by the africa cdc, most confirmed cases were children < years of age and % were male; similarly, in the central african republic, % of the confirmed cases were < years of age and % were male. as of august suspected cases and deaths have been reported in african countries, nearly all in the drc. this rate is significantly higher than the previously reported fatality rate of less than .% recorded during the –mpox outbreak. however, the size of these outbreaks could be much larger than reported due to under-ascertainment and under-reporting in those areas. consequently, the true number of infections is likely to be higher than the reported figures, while the case fatality rate may have been overestimated. moreover, it is reasonable to assume that community transmission is occurring in several african countries, considering the wide geographic distribution of cases and the diverse age groups involved. as a result, on august the world health organization declared the epidemic to be a second public health emergency of international concern. on august sweden reported the first imported case of mpox due to mpxv clade ib in eu/eea countries. hence, on august, the european centre for disease prevention and control adjusted the risk level of clade i for the european population, raising it from “very low” to “low” in response to the anticipated rise in imported cases across the region. nonetheless, the ecdc noted that the risk depended on type of contact and the population immunity setting. despite this, the agency stressed that the probability of the ongoing transmission of the virus strain within europe remained minimal. . risk factors understanding the risk factors associated with mpox transmission and spread is important to implement effective prevention and infection control strategies. zoonotic transmission occurs through direct contact with bodily fluids, the mucosal and cutaneous lesions of infected animals such as rodents and primates or the consumption of undercooked meat from infected animals. this is a significant risk factor, particularly in regions where interactions between humans and wildlife is common, including in rural areas with dense forests or regions with tropical rainforests such as central and west africa. despite human-to-animal transmission being uncommon, a few cases of human-to-dog transmission have been reported. although zoonotic transmission is the primary mode of infection, human-to-human transmission may prevail during outbreaks, involving the inhalation of respiratory droplets or direct contact with the lesions or bodily fluids of a patient. factors such as overcrowding, poor sanitation and inadequate healthcare infrastructure may facilitate the spread of mpox. nosocomial outbreaks and the transmission of mpxv during laboratory research as well as vertical transmission through the placenta have also been reported. socioeconomic disparities, including communities with limited access to healthcare, education and resources and cultural practices, including the hunting, handling or consumption of wildlife, are additional risk factors for mpox. primary zoonotic mpox is more common in men, as they are more likely to be hunters, and in younger individuals, as they are more likely to eat undercooked infected animals. in the outbreak, however, among the cases with known data on sexual behavior, .% identified as msm; among the cases who reported a type of transmission, .% reported a sexual encounter. sexual transmission has been suggested because virus dna has been detected in seminal fluid. the r of mpox during the current outbreak in italy was .among msm, showing that the virus has the potential to cause epidemics in this population. people unvaccinated against smallpox are at an increased risk of infection, while pediatric patients or young and immunocompromised adults such as plwh are at a higher risk of severe disease. mpox in people living with hiv a recent systematic review and meta-analysis showed that the pooled prevalence of hiv infection among patients diagnosed with mpox was %. more specifically, studies from europe and north america reported high prevalences of hiv co-infection of about % and %, respectively, while studies from nigeria in africa reported a relatively low prevalence of %. during the /nigerian mpox outbreak, .% of hospitalized patients with mpox were plwh. in the global mpox outbreak, % of the confirmed mpox cases were plwh, predominantly sexual and gender minority groups, indicating that sexual activity was underestimated as a major risk of transmission before the outbreak. living with hiv, receiving pre-exposure prophylaxis or reporting ≥ sexual partners in the past months as well as sex in sex venues/parties in the past months were found to be independent risk factors for mpox diagnosis. it has been reported that plwh with mpox have a higher frequency of perioral lesions and pharyngitis as well as a higher number of sexually transmitted infections. individuals with advanced or uncontrolled hiv infection are at a higher risk of severe mpox. the combination of hiv-induced immunosuppression and the virulence of the monkeypox virus may result in increased viral replication, prolonged disease and a higher risk of complications. severe complications and systemic manifestations were more common in people with a cd4 cell count < cells/μl than in those with > cells/μl, while death was observed in people with cd4 counts of < cells/μl and with a high hiv viral load. mpox severity was also related to poor hiv continuum of care outcomes and low cd4+ cell counts, while increased mortality was reported in plwh with cd4+ counts < cells/μl. in one study, the case fatality rates of mpox disease were .% and .% overall and in hiv-positive cases, respectively, demonstrating that hiv infection is associated with a higher risk of contracting and dying from mpox. in particular, plwh with a cd4 t cell count < cells/μl face a high risk of mortality due to mpox. furthermore, a cohort of plwh and mpox, which predominantly included individuals with advanced or uncontrolled hiv infection, showed that this population was significantly more likely to experience severe mpox manifestations and prolonged disease compared with those without hiv. on the contrary, other studies showed that there was no significant difference in disease severity and presentation between groups with and without hiv, especially for those with well-controlled hiv infection, suggesting that hiv status itself may not be a risk factor for mpox severity, but an indicator for increased sexual risk behaviors and, therefore, mpox transmission. healthcare providers and public health stakeholders should address the vulnerabilities of plwh and prioritize early detection, prompt treatment initiation and comprehensive care in order to improve the outcomes of mpox disease in this population. . clinical presentation the incubation period of mpox exhibits great variability depending on the outbreak and the presumed mode of exposure. it is estimated that the average duration between infection and symptom onset ranges from to days. the clinical presentation of mpox includes both a systemic illness and system-specific symptoms. studies of more recent outbreaks reveal a greater variability in the relationship between systemic disease and organ-specific symptoms. in this review, we delineated the most common clinical presentations observed in the outbreak, categorized by organ system and with respect to the natural course of the disease. systemic symptoms of mpox correspond with the active replication of the virus and may predate or follow the appearance of the characteristic rash. these symptoms include, but are not limited to, fever, headache, myalgia, fatigue and lymphadenopathy, lasting for one to five days. during the outbreak, the clinical presentation was frequently associated with rash development in the absence of systemic illness, while lymphadenopathy was usually related to the appearance of the skin rash. the characteristic rash is typically well circumscribed and follows a predictable evolution timeline. lesions described in the outbreak typically evolved in an asynchronous manner over to days, starting as macules of to mm on an edematous background and then evolving to papules, vesicles and umbilicated pustules before crusting and healing with complete re-epithelialization. pruritus is commonly associated with the crusting period. rarely, lesions coalesce into plaques or ulcerate and become necrotic. the number of lesions can vary from to on average, with some cases presenting up to lesions. in the recent outbreak, these lesions were more often located in the perioral, genital and perianal area, with fewer lesions appearing on the trunk or extremities, suggesting a possible correlation between sites of inoculation and lesion appearance. perioral and oral lesions are usually circular and white, commonly ulcerative in nature and with a central depression. they may appear on the tongue, lip mucosa, tonsils or pharynx and are associated with pain and dysphagia. genital lesions are usually solitary, located on the prepuce or the glans of the penis in males and on the labia in females and are almost universally associated with severe pain and edema. typically, perianal and anal lesions mimic proctitis, causing painful bowel movements; they are associated with discharge and bleeding and, in rare cases, with bowel perforation. their morphology is more ambiguous, spanning from vesicles to pustules to ulcers, often resembling herpes, syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum or other pathologies. the most common ocular manifestations of mpox include conjunctivitis, blepharitis, keratitis and secondary cellulitis, leading, in some cases, to loss of vision. the involvement of the central nervous system in the form of encephalitis and encephalomyelitis have been described, although it has not been elucidated if these manifestations represent a consequence of mpox infection or a secondary immune-mediated phenomenon. other systems can also be affected, causing severe complications such as sepsis, necrotizing lymphadenopathy, bronchopneumonia, myocarditis, abscess formation and hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. in a nationwide uk cohort, severe pain and secondary bacterial infection were the most common complications in hospitalized patients with mpox. . diagnosis mpox should be suspected in all patients with consistent clinical, laboratory and epidemiological findings. it should be considered in the differential diagnosis of all patients presenting with a morphologically suspicious rash, especially if consistent symptoms from other systems are present. a history of contact with suspected or confirmed cases or recent travel to areas where mpox is endemic or where outbreaks have been reported should be taken into account. in terms of laboratory testing, a polymerase chain reaction performed on material collected from typical lesions is considered to be the gold standard for mpox diagnosis. in the setting of numerous lesions, the sampling of multiple sites may increase the diagnostic accuracy. a pcr using throat swabs and blood adds little to the diagnosis in a clinical setting. antibody testing for mpox may be performed when a pcr is not readily available, with a relatively narrow seroconversion window after the appearance of symptoms. despite its value in research, electron microscopy is not considered feasible for routine diagnosis. histopathological findings in tissues presenting typical lesions are non-specific and have little value in clinical practice. a high index of suspicion and the availability of pcr testing are the cornerstones for an accurate and timely diagnosis of mpox. mpox needs to be differentiated from other exanthematous diseases such as chickenpox, measles, scabies, hand–mouth–foot disease, genital herpes, syphilis and other sexually transmissible infections. lymphadenopathy is common in mpox, but mostly absent in chickenpox. herpes often causes oral or anogenital polycyclic lesions, usually in people with similar previous episodes. when genital ulcers or proctitis are present, the recommended method for accurate diagnosis is pcr testing. furthermore, when sexual transmission is suspected, testing for other stis should also be conducted. . treatment the management of mpox infection should take into account the disease severity, clinical manifestations and involvement of specific anatomic sites as well as the immunological status of the patient, the risk of progression to severe disease and the development of complications. in the majority of immunocompetent patients, mpox presents as a mild clinical syndrome that can be optimally managed by supportive measures and minimal, if any, medical intervention. supportive measures should aim to optimize nutrition and hydration, pain management and the prevention of possible complications. hospitalization is usually indicated for patients experiencing severe infection who are at risk of malnourishment or dehydration due to lesions located at the level of the rectum or the oropharynx and for patients who develop complications or need intensive pain management. antiviral therapy is not indicated for all patients, but it is recommended for those with severe disease presenting with numerous confluent lesions, neurological manifestations and respiratory or multisystemic involvement. patients with a documented history of autoinflammatory and/or exfoliative skin disorders and ocular manifestations as well as patients with multimorbidity are also candidates for antiviral therapy. an immunocompromised status such as advanced hiv infection, hematological malignancy, bone marrow or solid organ transplantation, chemotherapy or radiation as well as documented autoimmune disease are all strong indicators for antiviral treatment. very young and very old individuals as well as pregnant and breastfeeding people can also benefit from antiviral therapy. the timing of antiviral therapy initiation is based on limited clinical data; however, early treatment initiation after the appearance of symptoms is thought to be associated with a more rapid clinical response and favorable clinical outcomes. the mainstay of antiviral therapy for mpox is tecovirimat, an agent with a favorable safety profile and mild side effects whose efficacy is being increasingly supported by observational data, especially for patients with severe disease and when started early in the course of disease. evidence from randomized clinical trials is currently lacking; however, several rcts are now ongoing. the preliminary results from palm suggest that tecovirimat is safe, but it did not improve clade i mpox outcomes. whether or not this is a clade-specific outcome remains to be investigated. tecovirimat is an inhibitor of the orthopoxvirus vp37 envelope-wrapping protein, effectively limiting the formation of the extracellular virus particle, necessary for viral dissemination within the host. a low barrier to the virus developing resistance to tecovirimat should be considered before treatment initiation and its overuse, especially in mild cases, should be avoided. it is available in oral and intravenous formulations. orally, the administered dose is mg q12hr for those < kg and q8hr for those > kg. the intravenous form is administered at mg q12hr for those < kg and at mg for those > kg. a switch from intravenous to oral treatment should be considered for patients who are able to take oral medication. treatment typically lasts days but, in selected cases, the treatment duration can be extended. possible drug interactions with immunosuppressive agents and antiretroviral treatment should be considered before treatment initiation. when tecovirimat is not available, cidofovir and brincidofovir represent alternative regimens that have been used in clinical practice with less favorable side-effect profiles and very limited data concerning efficacy. in patients with ocular mpox, tecovirimat is strongly advised with the addition of trifluridine in the form of eye drops or ointment applied q4hr for to days. skin lesions that fail to heal, extend despite treatment or show changes in terms of the morphology, associated erythema or other signs of inflammation must be evaluated for bacterial superinfection and appropriate antibiotic treatment initiated. . prevention .. contact precautions the implementation of effective infection control measures such as contact precautions is essential for the prevention of mpox transmission and spread within healthcare and community settings. however, increased community awareness and wider surveillance of cases through publicity and education about the risk factors, prevention and treatment of mpox are crucial to control and eliminate infection as well as to minimize stigmatization. in addition, the who and cdc guidelines highlight the importance of early detection, the isolation of cases, the appropriate use of personal protective equipment and communication with healthcare workers and the public. according to these guidelines, the contact precautions for mpox include the isolation of suspected or confirmed cases, the use of ppe and the implementation of strict hand-hygiene practices to minimize the risk of transmission. more specifically, contact and droplet precautions should be implemented for any suspected or confirmed patient with mpox as well as airborne precautions if aerosol-generating procedures are performed. furthermore, surfaces frequently used by the patient or where patient-care activities occur as well as patient-care equipment should be cleaned and disinfected, while fabric items such as linens, hospital gowns, towels and clothes should be carefully handled and collected. also, all bodily fluids and solid waste of patients with mpox should be treated as infectious waste. all patients with mpox should be advised to abstain from sex until all skin lesions have crusted, the scabs have fallen off and a fresh layer of skin has formed underneath. condoms should be consistently used during sexual activity for weeks after recovery. isolation of the suspected or confirmed mpox cases, ideally in a room with negative pressure and social distancing, is needed to prevent transmission. additionally, it is important to avoid any direct contact with animals such as rodents and primates as well as exposure to blood and inadequately cooked meat. the quarantine of imported animals for at least weeks should be implemented and laboratory research with live mpxv should be strictly regulated to minimize spill-over events. .. vaccination vaccination remains one of the primary strategies for the prevention and control of mpox outbreaks. vaccinia-poxvirus-based vaccines were used throughout the 20th century to eradicate human smallpox epidemics. these vaccines provide cross-protective immunity against mpox, providing a protection of about %. this has led to the incorporation of vaccinia-virus-based vaccines in the control efforts for outbreaks. vaccine-induced immunity lasts for a long period of time as people vaccinated against smallpox > years ago are still protected against mpox, while the incidence of mpox infections significantly increased years after the discontinuation of smallpox vaccination campaigns. acam2000 is a second-generation live-attenuated vaccinia-based vaccine that was approved by the fda in august for individuals > years of age to replace the older vaccinia-virus-based vaccines and it was used for mpox prevention. this vaccine is indicated for immunocompetent people and non-pregnant or non-breastfeeding people who are at a high risk of exposure. it is administered once by the percutaneous route using a bifurcated needle; a pustular-like skin reaction occurs at the injection site, forming a scab after –weeks. the acam2000 vaccine is effective against mpox infection; however, it can cause severe adverse effects such as myopericarditis, progressive vaccinia, eczema vaccinatum, post-vaccination encephalitis and severe fetal smallpox through vertical transmission. a modified vaccinia ankara vaccine, also known as jynneos in the usa, imvamune in canada or imvanex in europe, originated from the genetic modification of the vaccinia ankara–bavarian nordic virus grown in chicken embryo fibroblasts. it is a third-generation, live-attenuated, non-replicating viral vector vaccine that was approved by the fda in september and is indicated for the prevention of human smallpox and mpox in people over years of age at a high risk of these infections. it is subcutaneously or intradermally administered in two doses at least days apart. high immunogenicity and an excellent safety profile have been demonstrated in randomized clinical trials. since the outbreak, data on the effectiveness of a single-dose mva-bn show a moderate effect in preventing mpox infection. another third-generation live-attenuated replicating vaccine is lc16m8, which was derived from the lister strain of vaccinia and was licensed in japan for immunization against smallpox and mpox. studies have shown that lc16m8 is highly immunogenic against mpox, with a favorable safety profile. according to the who recommendations for vaccination strategies against mpxv infections, a primary preventive pre-exposure vaccination with third-generation non-replicating vaccines is only recommended for individuals at a high risk of exposure such as gay, bisexual or other msm with multiple sexual partners as well as sex workers, healthcare workers at a high risk of exposure, laboratory personnel working directly with any poxviruses and personnel designated by the health authorities who are directly involved in the treatment of and contact with possible mpox cases. mass vaccination is not currently required nor recommended for mpox. post-exposure preventive vaccination with a third-generation vaccine is recommended in the first –days of exposure and up to days for the close contacts of infected people with a high risk of exposure, but if administered between days to post-exposure, the vaccine only minimizes the symptoms and does not prevent infection. it is worth noting that in immunocompetent individuals, the acam2000 vaccine can be also administered for post-exposure prevention. thus, vaccination against mpox may be an effective measure for the prevention or attenuation of the disease, controlling the epidemics of mpox along with other preventive measures such as contact precautions. . reinfection and post-vaccination infection although the duration of immunity provided by vaccination or a past infection is under investigation, an increasing number of case reports of possible mpox reinfections have been published since january . for some of the possible reinfection cases, there is still a debate as to whether they are relapses of previous infections or not because confirmation from phylogenetic sequencing has not been possible. nevertheless, there is at least one case of reinfection that has been confirmed by whole-genome sequencing. the epidemiologic characteristics and risk factors for reinfection and post-vaccination infection show consistency with those described in the literature for primary mpox infections in the epidemic. sexually active msm reporting multiple sexual partners and condomless sexual intercourse compose the majority of these cases. of note, a significant proportion of the individuals diagnosed with reinfection or post-vaccination mpox infection had a concomitant sti. clinical manifestations of repeated or post-vaccination infections seem to differ from those reported in the outbreak in terms of the extent and severity. to date, no deaths have been reported among these cases, while the number of individuals who required hospitalization is limited. it is worth mentioning that more than % of the individuals diagnosed during the epidemic required hospitalization. in a global case series of individuals with repeated mpox infection, significantly fewer lesions were observed during reinfection compared with the initial infection and the time required for the resolution of symptoms was shorter. moreover, the extent of body involvement, the number of mucosal areas affected and analgesia requirement were lower during reinfection and none of the cases required hospitalization. when compared with repeat infections, individuals with infection after vaccination showed a less extensive involvement of extragenital areas and less analgesia requirement. in conclusion, the ever-increasing number of reinfection and breakthrough mpox cases underscores the importance of including mpox in the differential diagnosis of individuals with presumed immunity through recent infection or vaccination presenting with symptoms compatible with mpox. . global and community responses after the recognition of the first mpox cases in may in several non-endemic countries and the widespread epidemic that followed, a pheic was rapidly declared on july . to contain the spread of the disease, a rapid global response was warranted, capitalizing on the knowledge gained during the sars-cov-pandemic. the significance of international collaboration in terms of surveillance and data-sharing was immediately acknowledged. from the very beginning of the epidemic, information was collected and communicated in real time by the appropriate authorities/organizations, both at national and international levels. this led to the early identification of msm as the population most affected as well as the risk factors associated with this epidemic. as a result, sexual health clinics were on the frontline of this epidemic. the primary goal was the early detection of mpox cases so that timely isolation and contact tracing could take place. these interventions were necessary to reduce the spread of the virus. due to the possible stigmatizing features of the disease and given the lessons learned from the hiv epidemic, community involvement was deemed essential to cultivate trust, establish routes of communication and reach marginalized groups. several successful examples of community-led initiatives have been reported. early in the mpox outbreak in hiv/aids organizations in germany and transgender women’s groups in peru managed to reduce spread by raising awareness in the lgbtqi+ community, underlying the importance of community involvement. community engagement proved to be important in reducing stress and mpox-related stigma as well as distinguishing between real information and misinformation and conspiracy theories across social networks during the epidemic. moreover, at the beginning of this outbreak, a lack of trust in health systems among a significant proportion of the public after the experience of sars-cov-was still fresh. the cooperation of the state with community organizations managed to shift the sexual behavior of the population at risk to safer sexual practices, which ultimately contributed to limiting the epidemic. it seems that harm-reduction strategies and sex-positive messages were much more effective than the initial guidelines, which suggested strict abstinence. the final important pillar of the epidemic containment was the broad dispensing of available vaccines. pre- and post-exposure vaccination programs have played a key role in the strategies against mpox in north america and europe. unfortunately, the global response once again fell short of what was needed. early in the mpox global outbreak, access to vaccines was unequal across high- and low-income countries. the availability of vaccines in the african countries where the virus had been endemic for decades was negligible. on the other hand, high-income countries secured large supplies of mpox vaccines. in addition, as per august only two african countries had granted emergency use authorization for the mva-bn vaccine. as a result, during the current –outbreak originating in drc, the population of the affected regions was not vaccinated, favoring the rapid spread of the virus. this led international stakeholders to take measures, including the procurement and donation of hundreds of thousands of vaccine doses to affected countries. in order to facilitate timely and increased access to vaccines, the who proceeded with the prequalification approval of the mva-bn vaccine in september . . challenges and future perspectives while the who declared the end of the pheic for mpox in may sustained transmission of the clade iib virus has been established in humans, so the risk of resurgence remains a real public health threat, especially considering the current outbreak in african countries. moreover, clinicians should be aware that previous infection and vaccination do not preclude mpox and they should investigate further when clinical suspicion is high. data support the importance of vaccination and the recommendation that people who are at a high risk of mpxv infection should be prioritized to receive the mpox vaccine. this approach requires global vaccine availability in the areas historically affected by mpox and also in newly affected countries where access is limited. in the context of vaccine shortages when the number of those at risk exceeds vaccine availability, dose-sparing strategies or administration of at least a single dose of the vaccine to provide more widespread population coverage should be considered. the protection of immunosuppressed people, including people with advanced hiv disease, through vaccination also represents a highly relevant area for research and for policymakers. immune responses and immunity against clade iib mpxv are areas of active research, while phylogenetic and epidemiological analyses as well as randomized clinical trials are urgently needed. there is also a need to bolster public health surveillance so that relevant public health agencies are notified of cases of suspected relapse, reinfection and breakthrough infection to further inform policies and guidelines. for this to be accomplished, a unified, country-driven strategy with decentralized laboratories properly equipped to enhance their sequencing capacity should be adopted. the development of point-of-care tests would enable better, large-scale testing within a reasonable timeframe. the adaptation of an integrated, individualized and evidence-based management of cases, with a focus on the research and development of new treatment strategies and options, can lead to better prognosis and reduced morbidity and mortality. finally, future public health interventions and campaigns should engage key populations and communities to ensure greater acceptance and credibility of implemented policies. focusing on providing community-led structures with the authority and capacity to act is a proven strategy that can reduce costs and optimize efficacy.
monkeypox outbreak in the democratic republic of congo: a comprehensive review of clinical outcomes, public health implications, and security measures abstract background the monkeypox virus, a member of the orthopoxvirus genus, is responsible for the zoonotic disease known as mpx. primarily found in western and central africa, emerging studies indicate a shift in transmission dynamics. ongoing mpx outbreaks in the democratic republic of congo have escalated into significant public health concerns. objectives this review endeavors to provide a comprehensive analysis of the public health implications, clinical consequences, and preventive measures related to the current mpx outbreak in the drc. it focuses on the epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and public health responses to this global health challenge. methodology the research synthesizes data regarding mpx outbreaks in the drc, drawing from academic journals, public health reports, and case studies through a narrative review approach. results the recent outbreak in the drc has identified approximately suspected mpx cases, resulting in fatalities, which corresponds to a case fatality rate of .%. these cases have been documented across health sectors in out of provinces, representing the highest case count recorded to date. the epidemic has also encroached upon previously unaffected regions. hospitalization rates have varied between % and %, with a significant percentage of cases attributed to sexual transmission. analysis of demographic and geographic data revealed distinct patterns in viral spread. clinical outcomes have varied, with an average cfr close to %, influenced by factors such as timely diagnosis and access to healthcare services. rural areas have accounted for over % of the cases, highlighting the necessity for targeted public health interventions. control measures have focused on community awareness campaigns and immunization programs, reaching approximately % of the at‐risk population; however, challenges related to resource limitations and political instability have impeded effective response strategies. conclusion the ongoing mpx outbreak in the drc poses a substantial public health challenge. while progress has been made in managing the epidemic, it remains imperative to address resource deficiencies and enhance public health systems. strengthening international collaboration, expanding healthcare access, and improving surveillance capabilities are critical to mitigating the risk of future outbreaks. introduction monkeypox, formerly known as mpox, is a zoonotic illness caused by a viral species that is part of the orthopoxvirus genus, chordopoxvirinae subfamily, poxviridae family, and orthopoxvirus genus. the mpox virus, an orthopoxvirus belonging to the same genus as the variola virus that causes smallpox, vaccinia, and cowpox, is the cause of this zoonotic viral disease. infection caused by the mpox virus, which causes a vesicular rash resembling smallpox, fever, headache, and lymphadenopathy. nonetheless, case mortality rates and person–person transmission beyond intimate contacts vary from % to %, contingent upon the virus strain and host immunological status, and monkeypox infection is significantly less common than smallpox infection. the identification of mpxv dates back to when a nonfatal rash disease struck captive cynomolgus monkeys in copenhagen, denmark. the mpox virus was first detected in months after the democratic republic of the congo declared smallpox extinct. since then, monkeypox outbreaks have occurred in laboratories and zoos, and human cases have been reported in central and western africa. human‐to‐human transmission has been observed in central africa, and there have also been outbreaks in nonendemic countries linked to imported animals, such as the outbreak in the united states. these outbreaks highlight the global importance of this emerging zoonosis. mpxv can be transmitted through direct contact with infected animals or humans, as shown in figure . animal‐to‐human transmission occurs through bodily fluids, such as saliva or respiratory excretions, and through exposure to infected animal feces. due to limited resources, visiting forests where infected animals are common or sleeping outdoors, increases their risk of exposure. human‐to‐human transmission is less common and involves prolonged face‐to‐face contact or contact with infected lesions. recent studies highlight the prevalence of concurrent sexually transmitted infections among mpox patients indicating that mpox is also transmitted through sexual contact, with a high frequency of anogenital lesions suggesting direct inoculation during sexual activities. in a spanish study, out of mpox patients tested positive for various stis, including herpes simplex virus, neisseria gonorrhoeae, and chlamydia trachomatis. similarly, a us study found that % of patients tested for mpox were diagnosed with concurrent stis. additionally, the most extensive study across countries reported a % rate of concomitant stis among mpox patients, with syphilis, gonorrhea, and chlamydia being the most common. these findings underscore the importance of comprehensive sti screening for mpox patients, particularly those with high‐risk sexual behaviors. emphasizing the need for comprehensive sti screening in mpox management. both human‐to‐human and animal‐to‐human virus transmission determine the etiology and pathophysiology of the illness. since may there have been more than reported cases of human monkeypox globally, with cases identified across european countries. the countries in europe with the highest incidence of cases include spain, france, germany, and the united kingdom. the outbreak has revealed sustained person‐to‐person transmission and exhibits distinct clinical characteristics compared to prior studies. hospitalization rates are reported to range from % to %, and the condition is categorized as mild to moderate. to date, there have been reports of fatalities, originating from both nonendemic and african countries. notably, the documented prevalence of numerous sexual partners and incidents of chemsex indicate that sexual transmission among men who have sex with men is a significant factor contributing to the outbreak. the vaccination status of the affected individuals varies, with several healthcare professionals contracting the infection in the course of their duties. furthermore, individuals aged to years face a heightened risk of infection, as smallpox vaccination campaigns have ceased. in addition to that, more investigations are needed to determine whether the virus can be transferred via genital secretions during sexual activity. the purpose of this review is to present a thorough examination of the outbreaks of mpox in the drc, emphasizing the clinical results, public health responses, security measures, and suggestions to reduce the spread of the illness and prevent such outbreaks in the future. recent mpox outbreaks in the drc a recent mpox outbreak began on january in the drc. a total of suspected cases and deaths were reported in health zones in out of provinces. with additional cases appearing in places such as kinshasa, lualaba, and south kivu that had not previously reported mpox, this outbreak represents the greatest number of cases ever recorded. it has been noted that human‐to‐human transmission in nonaffected provinces has been fueled by cases with travel histories to endemic regions. in kenge, kwango province, the first cases of sexually transmitted mpox were also reported during this outbreak. the first case that is known to exist involved a belgian‐born man who traveled to kinshasa and soon after she began to exhibit symptoms. clade i mpxv was the virus that was identified by epidemiological studies, and it was most likely spread in belgium. several sexual and nonsexual contacts were positive for mpox after additional investigations. furthermore, outbreaks of mpox were observed in south kivu and kinshasa, where no cases had been recorded before. while the initial case in south kivu involved a young trader who traveled from a province where mpox was endemic, kinshasa experienced local transmission from people exposed in other areas. the province is now dealing with several issues that could contribute to the further spread. in the drc, research on animals has been carried out to learn more about the ecology and possible hosts or reservoirs of the mpox virus. to determine the virus reservoir and accidental hosts, national and international research partners are working together on these ongoing studies. epidemiology central africa's largest country, the drc, has a population of approximately .million. the topography of the nation is varied and includes mountains, grasslands, savannas, tropical rainforests, and plateaus. there are provinces in the country, and each has its own administrative and healthcare systems. poverty, violence, relocation, inadequate health systems, and frequent outbreaks of infectious diseases such as cholera, measles, and ebola are just a few of the numerous difficulties it faces. mpox, previously referred to as monkeypox, is a disease that is transmitted from animals to humans and is caused by the mpox virus, which belongs to the orthopoxvirus genus. clade i, formerly known as the congo basin clade, and clade ii, formerly known as the west african clade, which were formerly found in central and west africa, respectively, make up the mpxv genetic group. clade iia and clade iib are the two subclades that make up clade ii. the global mpox outbreak that began in and has impacted numerous non‐african countries is the result of clade iib. since the disease is endemic and has been documented since the drc has been among the countries most impacted by mpox worldwide. fever, headache, sore muscles, enlarged lymph nodes, and a vesicular‐pustular rash that may leave scars and scabs are the disease hallmarks. through direct contact with bodily fluids, lesions, or contaminated objects, the disease can spread from humans to animals or from animals to humans. there have also been reports of sexual transmission, particularly between men and guys who have intercourse. eleven provinces, mostly in the country's north and central regions, are endemic for the disease. in these areas, the virus spreads among wildlife reservoirs, including rodents and primates. nonetheless, the number of provinces reporting mpox has increased to in recent years, including areas that had not previously reported mpox, such as south kivu, lualaba, and kinshasa. with more than probable cases and more than confirmed deaths since january the current mpox outbreak in the drc is the largest and longest‐lasting outbreak in the history of the country. mpxv clade i, which is endemic to the country and has not been linked to the global outbreak of clade iib, is the cause of the outbreak. however, incidences of clade i virus transmission through sexual contact as well as cases involving sex workers have been reported for the first time, indicating a possible alteration in the virus's transmission dynamics. according to table data, the outbreak worsened from to its peak point in terms of cases, fatalities, and case‐fatality ratios in . there is a greater risk of infection and transmission in the population, as evidenced by the increase in both attack rates and reproductive numbers. clinical presentation and diagnosis of mpox the symptoms of the monkeypox virus are difficult to detect since they resemble those of other common illnesses, leading to a long list of differential diagnoses. pregnant women, immunosuppressed individuals, and children under the age of are among the groups most adversely impacted by the disease; however, some individuals may only show moderate symptoms that seldom necessitate medical attention. the who reports that skin rashes are the most typical signs of the human mpox virus. these rashes can also include fever, headaches, muscle aches, back discomfort, low energy, and swollen lymph nodes. there is a chance of transmission before mpox is identified because the incubation period is thought to be between and days, and the symptoms and signs persist between and weeks. numerous studies have delineated the phases of mpx progression, separating it into two primary stages. the first phase lasts to days and is characterized by lymphadenopathy, fever, headache, back discomfort, and low energy. the second stage, which is marked by a rash, occurs approximately to days after the fever has gone down. although mpx belongs to the large family of poxviruses, its distinctive symptom of lymphadenopathy sets it apart from the others and facilitates diagnosis. the who advises using a pcr test of viral swabs as a confirmatory test for monkeypox diagnosis; however, for samples obtained from vesicles, it is crucial to ensure that all protocols are followed to optimize the test's efficacy, including appropriate sample collection and laboratory transportation. however, this strategy does not eliminate the need for additional techniques, such as viral cell separation by culture or immunological techniques. each diagnostic technique has pros and cons and finding affordable tools that can meet the demands of mass screenings, speed, sensitivity, and specificity, among other requirements, can be challenging. depending on the settings, popular suggestions include pairing techniques to compensate for the absence of any of the capabilities. according to recent studies, there is a greater risk of the virus spreading from person to person. perianal vesicular symptoms are more common, indicating a sexual channel of transmission. this is particularly true for men who have sex with other men, with a high frequency of anogenital lesions suggesting direct inoculation during sexual activities. concurrent stis are common among mpox patients, with various pathogens detected, including herpes simplex virus, neisseria gonorrhoeae, and chlamydia trachomatis. more evidence‐based research in this area is now more important than ever, and to prevent misdiagnosis errors, new diagnostic methods with far higher specificity and sensitivity than those currently in use must be developed. accurate diagnosis, capacity building in affected areas, international collaboration, and community education should be given top priority when allocating funds for research. to contain monkeypox outbreaks and improve global readiness for emerging infectious hazards, a comprehensive approach integrating robust surveillance, enhanced international cooperation, and efficient diagnostics is needed. resources must be directed toward the development of accurate and accessible diagnostic technology. a comprehensive understanding of the clinical presentation and diagnostic challenges associated with monkeypox is crucial for a timely and effective epidemic response. to overcome current obstacles and strengthen global preparedness against newly emerging infectious risks, advancements in diagnostic methods and ongoing research are needed. public health responses a nationally funded strategy for mpox preparation and response was created by the drc ministry of public health, hygiene, and prevention. it included a variety of tasks that needed to be carried out. monitoring and detection strategies include stepping up mpox surveillance nationwide, especially in kinshasa; kenge, and kamituga; providing reference hospitals with sample collection and transport kits and logistical support for gathering, transporting, and analyzing samples from suspected cases from affected areas; enhancing the capacity of healthcare providers and professionals in mpox surveillance; keeping track of contacts of clinical and laboratory‐confirmed cases for days; genetically sequencing mpox samples to better understand circulating viral strains; and educating groups potentially at risk of danger. case management, infection prevention, and control, which include equipping medical personnel in the most affected areas with personal protective equipment and isolating confirmed cases in hospitals or at home to stop the spread of the infection; and training and capacity building, which includes educating laboratory personnel in kinshasa and other affected areas or provinces on how to collect, preserve, and properly deliver mpox samples. however, the most recent who situation report indicates that there are still some gaps and challenges in the public health response to the monkeypox outbreak in the drc. these include the persistence of the outbreak in some provinces, particularly in the mai‐ndombe region, where the case fatality ratio is above % and transmission is high; the emergence of sexual transmission of monkeypox, which presents a new risk factor and complicates contact tracing and prevention; the restricted accessibility and availability of the vaccine, which hinders the campaign's coverage and equity, particularly in rural and difficult‐to‐reach areas; the underdeveloped health system, which is overburdened with numerous public health emergencies and lacks sufficient infrastructure, personnel, supplies, and equipment; the low level of community engagement and trust, which influences the adoption and adherence of public health interventions; and the requirement for more specialized and culturally aware communication strategies. challenges and lessons for future outbreak preparedness in addition to presenting several difficulties for the public health response, the monkeypox outbreak in the drc has taught important lessons for future disease prevention and management. three primary issues were recognized and examined, along with the pertinent takeaways from the monkeypox pandemic. limited resources with a poor health system and low income, the drc is confronted with several public health emergencies, including covid‐measles, and ebola, which put further strain on its already constrained resources. a lack of resources, staff, equipment, and supplies has complicated the response to the monkeypox outbreak, particularly in isolated and rural areas where the illness is endemic. the quality and promptness of laboratory, immunization, surveillance, and infection prevention and control operations, as well as the delivery of sufficient patient and community care, have all been impacted by the lack of resources. consequently, in addition to prioritizing and coordinating the response to monkeypox with other existing public health activities, there is a need to enhance the health system and mobilize additional resources. this could entail increasing the amount of money that is sought after from partners and donors, providing additional material and human resources to the impacted areas, fostering better coordination and collaboration between many stakeholders, and strengthening the ability and resilience of healthcare providers and facilities. logistical difficulties the democratic republic of the congo is a vast and heterogeneous nation with intricate topography and inadequate facilities, creating logistical challenges for the distribution and execution of public health initiatives. transporting and distributing the vaccine, laboratory reagents, and personal protective equipment and getting to and reaching the afflicted individuals, particularly in remote and unsafe locations, have been difficult in response to the monkeypox outbreak. to guarantee the safety and accessibility of response teams and supplies, it is necessary to enhance supply chain management and logistics as well as work in tandem and coordinate with local authorities and partners, including the military, the police, and humanitarian organizations. this could entail putting in place more dependable and efficient methods for communication and transportation, ensuring that supplies are stored and maintained appropriately, creating backup plans in case of emergencies, and cultivating a relationship of trust and collaboration with the local authorities and community. community engagement the democratic republic of the congo is a diverse and dynamic culture with a wide range of political, religious, and cultural practices and beliefs. these factors impact how communities perceive and respond to disease. engaging and organizing communities to take part in and adhere to public health actions, such as reporting cases, accepting immunization, and minimizing contact with animals, has been difficult in the wake of the mpx outbreak. in addition, historical, political, and societal elements such as the effects of colonization, ongoing hostilities, and false information and rumors have caused opposition and mistrust in some areas. in addition to involving and empowering community‐based structures such as health committees, community health workers, and community leaders who can facilitate dialog and feedback between health authorities and communities and encourage the adoption of positive health behaviors, more specialized and culturally sensitive communication strategies need to be developed and put into practice. this could entail developing and delivering clear and consistent messages through appropriate channels and languages, addressing myths and misconceptions about the disease and the response, conducting formative research to understand the local context and needs, and acknowledging and rewarding the contributions and accomplishments of the communities. recommendations and future directions when mpx outbreaks occur in nonendemic areas, efficient containment and treatment measures are needed. there are no specific treatments for mpx, and little is known about its pathophysiology and epidemiology. for prevention, two smallpox vaccines, acam2000 and jynneostm, can be used as pre‐exposure prophylaxis, with jynneostm also approved for post‐exposure use. ongoing research is focused on developing more effective and safe treatments for mpox. pcr technology is utilized to diagnose mpx, and in more severe cases, antiviral medications may be prescribed. its control measures include immunizing close contacts, stopping the spread of the illness, and promptly identifying and isolating cases. further information is required about the effectiveness and safety of these therapies in treating mpx infections. to prevent and control mpx outbreaks, international collaboration, immunization programs, and surveillance are essential. to lessen the impact of future outbreaks, preparedness measures, including sound monitoring and detecting systems, are needed. to investigate variations in clinical features and their causes, more research is needed. the drc's current mpx outbreak necessitates a number of crucial measures. first, new epidemic investigations and response initiatives should be put into place, along with increased national surveillance. this entails being alert, quickly identifying and reporting symptoms, and isolating patients. second, to diagnose and isolate suspected or confirmed cases as soon as possible, healthcare personnel should receive diagnostic tool training and equipment. third, there should be more cross‐border cooperation and data exchange on infectious diseases, including human mpx. fourth, a “one health” strategy that prioritizes handwashing, infection prevention, and cleanliness in hospitals should be implemented. who and other international health organizations should assist the healthcare sector in efficiently handling the outbreak. conclusion the growing number of infections and the burden on the health system make the mpx outbreak in the drc a concerning situation. in comparison to earlier outbreaks, a significant number of new outbreaks have been revealed. this highlights the need for surveillance, immunization, and international collaboration, as well as the need for additional research and advancements in the management and prevention of mpx. important tasks include creating and assessing novel mpx diagnostics, therapies, and vaccinations; determining the effectiveness and financial implications of public health initiatives; and putting preventative measures in place to stop such outbreaks in the future. the outbreak has provided the public health community with an opportunity to learn since it has highlighted the shortcomings and shortcomings of the response as well as the gaps and requirements for the future. author contributions izere salomon: conceptualization, methodology, project administration, supervision, validation, writing original draft, reviewing draft, and correspondence. ali emir hamitoglu: writing–review and editing. unkwiye hertier: writing–review and editing. mugabekazi albright belise: writing–review and editing. uwase sandrine: writing–review and editing. benimana darius: writing–review and editing. methode yusufu abdoulkarim: writing–review and editing. conflicts of interest the authors declare no conflicts of interest.
challenges in global distribution and equitable access to monkeypox vaccines abstract the monkeypox outbreak has grown beyond the regions in which it was considered endemic. it has spread from central and west africa to non-endemic regions like europe, america, and other parts of the world. it has recently been classified as a public health emergency of international concern. this study evaluated the challenges faced globally and equitable access to monkeypox vaccines. global competition has been observed in the race to obtain vaccines, with low- and middle-income countries being disadvantaged. great inequity exists in the distribution of vaccines globally through advance purchase agreements, vaccine stockpiling, vaccine nationalism, the inequitable distribution of existing resources, and insufficient surveillance and reporting mechanisms. to address some of these challenges, there is a need for strengthening the global vaccine manufacturing capacity, targeting countries with elevated risk profiles and limited resources, strengthening surveillance systems, and addressing vaccine hesitancy. . introduction caused by the mpox virus, monkeypox is a zoonotic double-stranded dna virus belonging to the orthopoxvirus genus within the poxviridae family. this viral family also includes the variola virus, the causative agent of smallpox, a disease eradicated over forty-four years ago following widespread immunization efforts using the closely related vaccinia virus. mpox’s first human case was in in the democratic republic of congo. since then, multiple cases have been reported across the tropical rainforest regions of western and central africa. however, the mpox virus outbreak has expanded beyond its traditional endemic areas of central and west africa, spreading to multiple non-endemic countries across europe, the americas, and other parts of the world. five notable mpox outbreaks have been documented, occurring in –and . between january and august more than countries documented mpox cases, with over confirmed cases in laboratories and more than fatalities reported among these confirmed cases. in the usa, individuals were infected in with laboratory confirmation in cases, due to contact between prairie dogs and african rodents. from to the uk reported seven mpox cases, four linked to travel to regions where the disease is prevalent. in july two people returning from nigeria were diagnosed with mpox in texas and maryland, usa. the rapid global spread of the virus, primarily fueled by international travel and mobility, led to the world health organization designating mpox as a public health emergency of international concern under the international health regulations. on august the who director-general officially declared the mpox outbreak a public health emergency, highlighting the rapid spread of the disease, the growing number of cases globally, and the urgent need for coordinated international efforts to control its transmission. over the years, vaccines have proven effective in infectious disease control and prevention, and mpox is no exception. given the close relationship between the two viruses, existing vaccines, such as the smallpox vaccine, have shown efficacy in preventing mpox infections. however, the global response to the mpox outbreak has exposed deep-seated challenges in distribution and equitable vaccine access. factors such as vaccine hoarding, a lack of manufacturing capacity in lmics, logistical barriers, and intellectual property issues hinder equitable distribution. this research examines the global challenges in distributing and ensuring equitable access to mpox vaccines. in doing so, it seeks to contribute to ongoing efforts to achieve equitable health outcomes in the global fight against emerging infectious diseases. . monkeypox vaccines immunological reactions to a single orthopox virus can recognize other orthopox viruses and provide variable degrees of protection based on the similarity between the different orthopox viruses. the viruses variola, vaccinia, and monkeypox are classified under the genus of orthopox viruses. because of shared antigens, vaccination can effectively prevent both variola and monkeypox. recent research has demonstrated that the vaccinia vaccine, previously known for its efficacy in preventing smallpox, can also protect against the mpox virus. this immunological cross-reactivity has facilitated the development of several animal models of smallpox infection, which have been utilized to evaluate the effectiveness of vaccinations and antivirals. two factors are primarily responsible for this cross-reactivity. firstly, the orthopox viruses exhibit a significant level of sequence similarity, particularly in immunologically essential proteins, resulting in a substantial number of common immune epitopes. the reaction includes a broad range of antibodies targeting a minimum of membrane and structural proteins. similarly, t cell responses detect epitopes in a wide range of viral proteins, with cd4 t cells showing a preference for recognizing structural proteins, while cd8 t cells specifically target proteins that are encoded early in the viral life cycle, such as virulence factors. a neutralizing antibody was established to protect against smallpox in humans and against other orthopox viruses in animal models. though not essential for protection, t cells act by contributing to viral clearance. some of the first evidence that vaccinia-specific immune responses can protect against mpox came from investigations conducted in the 1980s. three studies were conducted on chimpanzees, rhesus macaques, and cynomolgus macaques to determine the efficacy of smallpox vaccines against the mpox virus using the dryvax vaccine. the result showed that almost all vaccinated animals were protected against the virus. the one exception to the above results was determined to have not responded to the vaccine. although these studies were small, they suggested that smallpox vaccines offered some protection from the mpox virus. this laid the groundwork for understanding the cross-protective immunity between smallpox and mpox and has had a massive role in vaccine development and public health strategies. the relationship between the rise in mpox cases following the end of smallpox vaccination and a growing population with limited immune exposure has been hypothesized and associated with a growing population with limited immune exposure. due to concerns about bioterrorism and increasing outbreaks of the mpox virus, the who has continued to license the smallpox vaccines. smallpox vaccines are classified according to generation. first-generation smallpox vaccines contained live vaccine viruses and were administered through bifurcated needles. historically, patients with a characteristic pustule were protected against the virus. these vaccines, which include dryvax®, apsv®, lancy–vaxina®, and l-ivp®, were last produced in the early 1980s. rare but potentially life-threatening complications, such as post-vaccinal encephalitis, progressive vaccinia, and myopericarditis, mainly occurred in immunocompromised patients. dryvax was developed by wyeth laboratories, consisting of the new york city board of health strain of vaccinia and the lister/elstree and ikeda vaccinia virus strains, which were lymph-derived and cultivated on the skin of animals. the routine use of this vaccine ended in the united states in the license for dryvax was revoked in and the vaccine remains insufficient. the second-generation smallpox vaccines contained replication-competent viruses produced in a controlled laboratory setting. the focus was on eliciting a similar immune response to the first generation while curbing adverse side effects. the third generation of smallpox vaccines concentrated on attenuated vaccine strains such as lc16m8, mva, nyvac, and dvvl to improve the safety profile. the united states has authorized second- and third-generation smallpox vaccines for mpox vaccination. cell culture methods were utilized for their development to enhance the safety traits of these vaccines. in the us food and drug administration licensed acam2000. it is generated from a clone of dryvax. originating from emergent bio solutions, this vaccine is specifically designed for active vaccination against smallpox, excluding mpox disease, in those with a high risk for smallpox virus infection. while the efficacy of acam2000 in preventing mpox has not been definitively shown, several studies have verified a certain level of immunogenicity. additionally, one research study demonstrated protection against this virus by employing its first-generation progenitor, dryvax. although the united states has a large stock of acam2000, this vaccine exhibits more adverse events and contraindications than the third generation. the adverse effects associated with this vaccine injection included pain and swelling at the injection site, fatigue, and muscular discomfort in about % of the recipients. additionally, –% of the recipients experienced lymphadenopathy and headache, while around % had fever. about % of the recipients reported joint pain, backache, gastrointestinal pain, or nausea. more severe adverse effects encompassed widespread vaccinia, eczema vaccinatum, progressive vaccinia, post-vaccinal encephalopathy or encephalitis, and mortality. this vaccine was contraindicated for individuals with severely compromised immune systems, pregnant women or lactating mothers, those with cardiac disease or cardiac risk factors, individuals with active eczema, and infants under months of age. additional vaccines based on the vaccinia virus were created by subjecting the virus to repeated passage in a primary cell culture or eggs to attenuate it. in the fda approved jynneos, a third-generation smallpox vaccine. it is a product of the modified vaccinia ankara attenuated strain, created through more than serial passages of the vaccinia virus ankara strain in chick embryo fibroblast cells. it is purified using tangential flow filtration and supplied as a frozen liquid suspension. the vaccine is administered subcutaneously in two doses, days apart, usually in the upper arm. jynneos can also be administered intradermally, though this method is not recommended for individuals with weakened immune systems or a history of keloid scarring and is not preferred as the initial dose for post-exposure vaccination. after two doses, the immune response is comparable to that of acam2000 but with fewer side effects. mva-based vaccines do not produce the typical skin reaction. still, common mild side effects include pain at the injection site, redness, swelling, itching, and induration at the injection site, as well as fatigue, muscle aches, headaches, nausea, and chills. fever is uncommon and observed in about % of recipients; cardiac events were reported in about %, with no cases of myopericarditis. the vaccine approval for the protection from smallpox in adults came from the european medicines agency in under the trade name imvanex and under the trade name imvamune from the public health agency of canada in the same year. in the phac expanded imvamune’s use to include mpox and other orthopoxvirus infections, and in july the ema similarly extended imvanex’s use to cover monkeypox and vaccinia-related diseases. lc16m8 is another third-generation vaccine developed from the lister strain used in first-generation vaccines. through multiple tissue culture passages and selection for an attenuated phenotype, the lc16m8 strain was produced and lacked a full-length, functional b5 membrane protein. the vaccine is produced in cell culture using rabbit kidney cells and has been licensed since for active smallpox vaccination in japan. in august japan expanded the vaccine’s use to include protection against mpox. due to their attenuated nature, these vaccines have a better safety profile and can be given to immunocompromised individuals. the effectiveness of these vaccines against mpox is inferred from animal studies showing protection against the mpox virus in non-human primates vaccinated with these vaccines, as well as clinical trials that have demonstrated their immunogenicity in humans. these vaccines can be used pre-exposure to prevent infection and illness or mitigate infection and disease post-exposure. pre-exposure vaccination is recommended for individuals at the highest risk, with second- or third-generation vaccines providing the most effective protection. post-exposure vaccination is ideally administered within four days of exposure to prevent infection. however, it can still be given up to days after exposure to lessen the severity of the disease. second- or third-generation vaccines are also preferred for post-exposure vaccination. in july authorities in montreal, qc, canada, administered at least doses. in all cases, healthcare professionals should know who may qualify for vaccination so they can consult national health authorities about accessing vaccines from national stockpiles. smallpox vaccines are not available commercially or privately. . challenges in global distribution of monkeypox vaccines the world health organization has drawn attention to global competition for mpox vaccines, with countries vying for access to the .million currently available doses. there is a growing concern that low-income countries may encounter challenges securing the vaccine. most notably, many african countries where mpox has been prevalent for decades are yet to receive a single dose of the vaccine. wealthier nations have obtained most of the available doses, limiting options for other affected countries, particularly those in africa. aids, covid-and the current monkeypox outbreak are evidence of inequities in global health strategy. it can be observed that global health strategies for disease burden control are only put in place when the global north is affected. the concentration of global vaccine production in the global north, with numerous vaccine production facilities in the united states, japan, and europe, has led to a reliance on vaccine supply from these regions. this reliance creates significant inequity in global vaccine coverage and insufficient domestic production, particularly in low- and middle-income nations. despite the establishment of vaccine production facilities by foreign pharmaceutical industries across africa, they still produce less than % of all vaccines used on the continent. additional challenges, such as the lack of qualified personnel, specialized vaccine development, and manufacturing infrastructure, inadequate training, ineffective awareness campaigns, and difficulties collecting and processing critical immunization data, further complicate the situation. furthermore, challenges such as an unstable electricity supply and inadequate cold chain facilities could significantly impede comprehensive vaccine manufacturing in africa. . barriers to equitable access to monkeypox vaccines advance purchase agreements: high-income countries have leveraged advance purchase agreements to secure priority access to newly produced vaccines. these agreements allow wealthier nations to stockpile vaccines, often at the expense of countries that may be more affected by monkeypox. this practice not only limits the availability of vaccines for lower-income nations but also reinforces inequities, as those countries cannot compete financially in the vaccine market. a more equitable approach would involve manufacturers setting aside a portion of their vaccine supply for global distribution, ensuring that all countries have access regardless of their economic status. vaccine stockpiling reluctance: nations with large stockpiles of vaccines are often hesitant to share these resources. this reluctance stems from concerns about maintaining sufficient supplies for their populations amid outbreaks. however, this hoarding behavior exacerbates global disparities in vaccine access, particularly affecting historically endemic countries that experience the highest case fatality rates. to address this issue, countries should commit to contributing a portion of their stockpiled vaccines to an international distribution network, aligning their actions with global health commitments, and fostering collective security against outbreaks. lack of organized mechanisms for low-income countries: many low-income nations lack the infrastructure and financial means to procure vaccines independently, relying instead on international aid and charity. this dependency can lead to inconsistent access and delays in vaccination efforts, ultimately allowing the disease to spread unchecked. establishing a coordinated global procurement and distribution system could help bridge this gap. like the successful revolving fund for access to vaccines in the americas, such a system would provide a structured approach for low-income countries to secure necessary vaccines, ensuring they are not left behind during public health emergencies. vaccine nationalism: during health crises, many countries prioritize securing vaccines for their populations, a practice often called vaccine nationalism. this trend was evident during past outbreaks, such as those of h1n1 and covid-where wealthier nations quickly acquired the majority of available doses, leaving low-income countries with limited access. the current landscape for monkeypox is no different, as high-income countries have disproportionately secured vaccine supplies, creating a significant gap in availability for those most affected. to combat this, international frameworks and agreements are needed to promote fair distribution practices and discourage hoarding. inequitable distribution of existing resources: even when vaccines are available, their distribution is often inequitable. many countries with a high monkeypox prevalence receive little to no doses, while nations with minimal cases secure large quantities. this disconnect between the disease burden and vaccine access is unjust and highlights a critical need for allocation strategies prioritizing regions most in need. developing criteria based on case severity and potential risk factors can help guide equitable distribution. insufficient surveillance and reporting mechanisms: countries needing more robust health surveillance systems often need help accurately documenting monkeypox cases. this limitation can lead to underreporting, resulting in these countries receiving fewer vaccines due to perceived lower needs. to address this, international support is crucial for building the surveillance capacity in vulnerable nations. enhanced data collection and reporting will improve vaccine allocation decisions and help contain future outbreaks effectively. . strategies to improve global distribution and access the global distribution of the monkeypox vaccine has faced many challenges, especially in ensuring equitable distribution and access for vulnerable populations. it can be improved through enhancing global health policies; establishing a new public health structure; global health financing; addressing pharmaceutical monopolies; price transparency; enhancing vaccine confidence and uptake; utilizing social media for communication; implementing ring vaccination strategies; and international cooperation and solidarity. . recommendations .. strengthening global vaccine manufacturing capacity significant disparities in the fair access to necessary medical countermeasures, such as vaccines, were brought to light by the covid-pandemic. the manufacturing capacity for pandemic vaccines is concentrated in too few countries. eight of every ten vaccine doses produced have gone to high-income countries. expanding the manufacturing capacity across different regions is crucial to overcoming supply constraints, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. this could involve transferring technology to these regions, fostering partnerships between pharmaceutical companies and local producers, and encouraging cooperation between players from the public sector, business sector, academic institutions, and civil society. .. targeting countries with elevated risk profiles and limited access to resources nigeria, ghana, and cameroon have recorded about % of global monkeypox fatalities since but have fewer than % of the total cases worldwide. countries should be prioritized based on ethical principles. this prioritization could specify the order in which countries receive required doses or how large a share they receive from a given tranche. under either method, historically endemic countries should receive the highest priority for monkeypox vaccines. after that, the priority should be determined using countries’ projected cases and severity of outcomes. vaccine distribution should prioritize regions experiencing the highest monkeypox incidence and populations at higher risk. .. overcoming vaccine nationalism through platforms like covax platforms such as covax could be adapted to include monkeypox vaccines, ensuring a more coordinated global response. establishing an international task force similar to the act accelerator, used during covid-could facilitate the distribution of monkeypox vaccines to the most vulnerable populations. covax was designed as an end-to-end coordination mechanism encompassing research and development and manufacturing, policy guidance, vaccine portfolio development, regulatory systems, supply allocation and country readiness assessments, transport logistics, vaccine storage and administration, and the monitoring of country coverage and absorption rates. it significantly alleviated the suffering caused by covid-in the global south. today, the initiative has supplied % of all covid-vaccine doses provided to low-income countries during the pandemic. a total of of the amc-eligible economies relied on covax for over half of their covid-vaccine supply. .. strengthening health surveillance systems a significant contributor to vaccine access inequities, especially in low- and middle-income countries, is the underreporting of mpox cases, especially in the central and west african regions. this is mainly attributable to the weak health surveillance systems in rural areas, which prevent the early detection of cases, leading to the underreporting of cases. due to this, the disease’s hotspots may not be readily identified early, consequently preventing vaccines from being allocated to such areas. to address this issue, we recommend strengthening health surveillance systems in these regions by providing early warning systems incorporating robust data collection and sharing mechanisms. this will help prompt the detection and identification of cases in this region. in addition, assisting financially and technically to the end of developing disease monitoring and reporting systems, especially in low- and middle-income countries, will help improve vaccine access and equity. .. addressing vaccine hesitancy a key challenge in the equitable distribution of mpox vaccines is the unwillingness of people to receive these vaccines despite their availability. this is especially common in the global south due to a need for more awareness, misinformation, or both. the addressing of vaccine hesitancy by healthcare workers, community leaders, and local influencers is paramount. this can be achieved via well-planned public health campaigns and community engagement aimed at adequately informing people about and sensitizing people to the importance of vaccines, debunking myths about vaccines, and encouraging at-risk populations to get vaccinated. this would increase vaccination and the acceptance of vaccines. . conclusions as the world continues to grapple with the mpox epidemic, with some countries being more significantly affected than others, there is an urgent need for a collaborative and progressive approach towards ensuring that countermeasures are not only provided but also fairly and equitably distributed to affected countries. overcoming the challenges facing global distribution and equitable access to the mpox vaccine through measures such as strengthening the global vaccine manufacturing capacity, overcoming vaccine nationalism through platforms like covax, and addressing vaccine hesitancy are crucial steps in the fight against the mpox epidemic. the development of international research and development centers, as well as vaccine distribution centers, can improve vaccine availability, reduce scarcity, and address the need for vaccine nationalism or hoarding. a global perspective policy on the equitable distribution of vaccines not just for mpox but for other diseases is crucial.
from outbreaks to artificial intelligence: a comprehensive review of monkeypox virus epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment, vaccination, and deep learning applications abstract objectives: after the global impact of the covid-pandemic, concerns over virus transmission have risen. a state of health emergency was declared in due to clade of the monkeypox virus. in august another emergency was declared by the world health organization because of the widespread clade 1b, which caused a more severe and lethal disease. this review synthesizes current mpox knowledge to assist policymakers, clinicians, and researchers in developing effective diagnostics, therapeutic interventions, vaccination strategies, and outbreak management. methods: this systematic review study searched for articles on virus epidemiology, virology, clinical features, transmission routes, available drugs and vaccines, and new artificial intelligence applications in diagnosis and drug discovery. results: mpox virus is a –-nm, double-stranded dna virus that causes smallpox-like skin lesions. tecovirimat is the primary drug for severe cases, especially in people with suppressed immune systems. smallpox vaccines can help prevent mpox infection because of the genetic similarities between the mpox and smallpox viruses. ai-based models can assist medical teams in promptly diagnosing mpox skin lesions, improving decision-making for treatment. conclusion: this review highlights the importance of using traditional public health knowledge alongside modern ai to manage mpox outbreaks effectively. it shows that we need strong public health policies, focused interventions, and ongoing research on how ai can help control infectious diseases. . introduction monkeypox is a severe and potentially life-threatening zoonotic infectious disease found in central and west africa, but it is usually self-limiting. this tropical viral infectious disease is caused by the family poxviridae, the subfamily chordopoxvirinae, and the genus orthopoxvirus. these are among the largest known dna viruses, in both size and genetic complexity. its endemic prevalence in tropical regions, such as africa, and the characteristics of the pathogen that causes it highlight the tropical and infectious nature of this disease. it has two distinct strains: clade the central african strain, which causes a more severe disease with a higher fatality rate, and clade or the west african strain, which tends to result in a milder illness. after an incubation period of –weeks, nonspecific symptoms such as fever, headache, lymphadenopathy, and muscle pain appear, followed by rashes. in the outbreak, skin lesions were mainly reported in the anogenital region. it spreads through contact with infected animals, bodily fluids, or contaminated objects. pregnant women, children, those with an eczema history, and immunocompromised individuals are at higher risk. mpox is diagnosed through polymerase chain reaction testing of skin or mucous-membrane samples. treatment for mpox mainly involves supportive care. antiviral drugs such as tecovirimat, cidofovir, and brincidofovir are utilized under specific conditions. developing new drug delivery systems, such as tecovirimat adsorbed onto carbon microtubes, shows promise for more effective treatment. preventive measures are crucial, including avoiding direct contact with infected persons and adhering to strict hygiene and quarantine protocols. smallpox vaccines provide cross-protection against mpox due to genetic similarities, while mrna-based vaccines are being developed for targeted prevention. from january to august over mpox cases and deaths were reported globally, representing a significant public health challenge. the world health organization attributed this outbreak to the highly virulent clade 1b strain, associated with severe clinical manifestations and elevated mortality rates. the outbreak primarily affected east, central, west, and southern africa, with high cases reported in burundi, kenya, rwanda, uganda, the central african republic, ivory coast, and south africa. the rapid spread within these regions highlighted the need for coordinated containment strategies and improved healthcare infrastructure to manage such outbreaks. in august sweden reported the first case of clade 1b outside africa. the case involved an individual who had recently traveled to an affected african region, underscoring the significant role of international travel in the global spread of infectious diseases. this development emphasized the need for policymakers to strengthen border health protocols, implement targeted surveillance measures, and enhance global collaboration to prevent cross-border transmission. the outbreak has reinforced the importance of integrating travel-related health policies with outbreak management strategies to mitigate the risks of highly transmissible pathogens. this review brings together the latest knowledge about mpox, covering key areas such as its epidemiology, clinical features, diagnostic methods, treatment options, vaccination strategies, and the emerging role of artificial intelligence in disease management. by combining traditional public health approaches with cutting-edge ai innovations, this review provides valuable insights for policymakers, clinicians, and researchers. it aims to support decision-making, identify research gaps, and enhance preparedness for managing mpox and similar infectious diseases. this comprehensive perspective contributes to global efforts to control outbreaks and strengthen public health responses. . method and material between march and august we conducted a comprehensive literature search employing advanced search techniques on pubmed, scopus, and google scholar to identify appropriate studies on mpox. our priority was on articles published from onward, while earlier publications were included selectively to provide historical context and foundational information. the search strategy utilized combinations of keywords such as “monkeypox epidemiology,” “clinical features of monkeypox,” “pcr monkeypox,” “monkeypox treatment options,” “monkeypox vaccines,” and “artificial intelligence in infectious diseases.” boolean operators were employed to refine results, for instance, “monkeypox and ” and “ai and monkeypox and diagnosis.” we defined strict inclusion and exclusion criteria to ensure the quality and relevance of the studies. peer-reviewed articles, case reports, case series, and studies involving human subjects were included, particularly those addressing epidemiology, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, treatment, vaccination, and ai applications. non–peer-reviewed articles, studies focusing exclusively on animal models, articles with insufficient data, and meta-analyses were excluded. we adopted a double-masked screening process to minimize selection bias. two independent reviewers assessed article titles and abstracts. discrepancies were resolved through discussion or consultation with a third reviewer. full-text articles were evaluated using a predefined checklist to ensure methodological rigor and relevance. to further reduce bias, a fourth team member reviewed the final selection and data extraction for accuracy. utilizing multiple databases also ensured the comprehensive coverage of the available literature. data extraction followed a systematic approach, capturing key details such as study design, geographical location, sample characteristics, clinical findings, and significant outcomes. a standardized extraction form was used to maintain uniformity across studies. the findings were synthesized qualitatively to provide a thorough overview of mpox's epidemiology, clinical features, diagnostic methods, treatment strategies, and ai applications. the flowchart clearly outlines the thorough and methodical process we use for selecting articles, ensuring quality and relevance. . results .. history and epidemiology in the virus was named mpox after a new orthopoxvirus outbreak among cynomolgus monkeys in copenhagen. the first case of human infection with the mpox in the democratic republic of the congo was observed in in a -month-old boy. in the 1970s, mpox outbreaks in the drc spread through human-to-human transmission and close contact with infected animals during the hunts in warm seasons and hunting areas. the increase in human-to-human transmission raises apprehensions about the potential for widespread zoonotic disease. as a result, between and the who reported suspected cases of the disease and deaths through the implementation of surveillance programs. subsequently, positive cases decreased dramatically over the following six years, with only cases registered in cameroon, gabon, and the drc from to . kasaï-oriental province in the drc was the site of the next major outbreak two years following with suspected cases in the katako-kumba region and in the lodja health zone. between and the drc and car experienced an ongoing mpox outbreak, during which the ministry of health of drc documented cases over the three years. in the united states reported the first human cases of mpox outside africa, with instances of clade mpox, with a median age of years traced back to prairie dogs that had been infected by rodents transported from ghana to texas. from september to december cases spread in sudan's unity state, with cases reported across nine locations in congo by . no outbreaks occurred outside africa until . in africa, outbreaks were reported in the drc, sierra leone, and car between and . these included a small outbreak in the likouala region of the drc, an outbreak in bo city, sierra leone, and reported cases in bangassou, in car. a more widespread outbreak occurred in the drc between and with suspected cases detected during the country's surveillance program. the largest outbreak of mpox in west africa occurred between and with cases following the infection of an -year-old child in nigeria. the travel of suspected cases of clade from nigeria to the united kingdom and israel caused the outbreak in these two countries. in july a middle-aged american man with a history of traveling to nigeria was reported as an infection-positive case in the united states. as vaccination against smallpox declined, global immunity to orthopoxviruses also decreased. in march while the world was still grappling with covid-six confirmed cases of mpox and two deaths were reported in the car. from the beginning of until april the drc registered suspected cases with deaths. in a major global outbreak of mpox occurred as the infection spread from africa to europe and america. the majority of cases were among men who have sex with men, many of whom had not traveled to areas where the disease is endemic. it is vital to clarify the epidemiological links between instances in different regions and the role of asymptomatic in spreading the virus. comparatively to the practically steady and declining trend of obtaining this virus in africa in is seen. between the start of and the writing of this article in august, there have been more than positive cases with deaths. unlike the outbreak with clade the who has linked this new outbreak in the drc to the more lethal strain of the virus, clade 1b, to neighboring nations. the new outbreak began in july of this year and is currently affecting east, central, west, and south africa. the nations that reported positive cases of the new disease in the most recent outbreak were burundi, kenya, rwanda, and uganda in east africa; the car in central africa; ivory coast in west africa; and south africa. on august the who again issued a public health emergency due to the general spread of the most current strain. the clade has quickly spread to countries outside africa, marking a significant global impact. on august sweden became the first nation outside of africa to record a positive case of the hazardous clade of mpox in someone who had recently resided in africa. pakistan and the philippines also announced new positive cases of the clade 1b following sweden's case. .. virology the mpox virus is a double-stranded dna virus belonging to the poxviridae family and genus orthopoxviruses. its vast persistence in the zoonotic cycle and diverse range of hosts set it apart from other members of this family. it was known by this name since after infecting cynomolgus monkeys. there are now two different clades of the mpox virus. clade is the leading cause of mpox infections in central africa and the congo basin, with a case-fatality rate ranging from % to %. conversely, the most common strain in west africa is clade which has a much lower case-fatality rate of about .%. the global outbreak of mpox was similarly linked to clade which exhibited distinct severity and clinical manifestations when compared to clade . the differences in case-fatality rates and infection severity between these two clades are caused by a slight genetic variance of around .% in their genomic sequences. host–response modifier genes, such as the complement pathway inhibitor enzyme gene, exhibit diversity among the clades of the mpox virus, contributing to the differences between them. as suggested by animal studies, the absence of this gene in clade is responsible for the lower case-fatality rate observed in this clade. the b.lineage, a subgroup of clade 2b, was responsible for the global outbreak, and the only reported case of mpox in iran was infected with this lineage. the mpox genome is a -kilobase pair ds-dna linear genome with inverted terminal repeats at both ends. it encodes approximately proteins essential for viral particle formation, dna replication, and completing the viral structure within the host cell. the mpox virus has a brick-shaped structure measuring –nm. its surface is covered in tubular filaments, and a biconcave core houses the viral genome, similar to those of variola and vaccinia viruses. .. diagnose diagnosing mpox without clinical testing is especially important in low-resource settings where access to healthcare facilities and laboratory tests is limited. recognizing key symptoms, such as fever, headache, muscle aches, back pain, swollen lymph nodes, and a distinctive rash that progresses through various stages, can help identify the disease early. this approach can reduce the financial burden on families and ensure timely care. social and environmental factors play a major role in the spread of mpox. in regions where the disease is common, such as parts of africa, people often live in close contact with wildlife, increasing the risk of catching the virus. activities like hunting and eating bushmeat expose individuals to infected animals, such as rodents and primates, which are the primary carriers of the virus. communities living near forests or rural areas where these animals are common face a higher risk of infection. poor living conditions, such as lack of clean water, overcrowded homes, and limited access to healthcare, make it easier for the disease to spread within families and neighborhoods. migration, travel, and large gatherings also contribute to the virus moving into new areas. raising awareness about these risks, encouraging preventive actions, and training healthcare workers to identify symptoms can make a big difference in controlling mpox outbreaks and protecting vulnerable communities. ... laboratory diagnosis as advised by the who, other potential diagnoses such as syphilis, orf, mycosis, and drug sensitivity reactions should also be considered in the diagnosis of mpox infection. real-time pcr is the most crucial test for virus detection, with laboratory guidelines recommending the targeting of at least two common genes among different strains of the disease. this adaptability is evident in the targeting of genes such as the tnf receptor gene, e9l dna polymerase gene, b6r envelope protein gene, and dna-dependent rna polymerase gene, along with proposed target proteins including polymerase subunit b7r, fl3, n3r, c3l complement-binding protein, cp protein gene, and o2l gene. other less common identification methods include electron microscopy following staining to identify the virus in lesion samples and detecting specific viral antigens through immunohistochemistrical methods. because the virus proliferates in mammalian cell lines, including hela, vero, bsc-and rk-virus culture using these cell lines is one of the more established diagnostic methods. diagnosing mpox with specific serological tests is challenging due to potential cross-reactivity with other orthopoxviruses. assessing igm in the first week or igg in paired samples days apart can significantly impact patient care and aid in diagnosis. .. incubation period according to reports from the mpox outbreak, the illness typically takes to days to incubate. however, the length of time has varied depending on the region. the incubation period ranged from .to .days among patients tested in italy in may and june of . compared to the outbreak in the united states, which lasted between and days, it seems that the incubation time for mpox infections in has changed. furthermore, several factors affect the incubation period, like the infection route. for instance, compared to infection through sexual contact, the incubation time is shortened by being bitten or scratched. additionally, some reports indicate that this period can extend to days. .. pathogenesis the method of virus entry and the specific clade of mpox can affect the clinical manifestation of infection. the virus begins reproducing after it invades the host's respiratory system and mucous membranes in the throat and mouth through the respiratory route. likewise, after exposure to mpox in the dermis, keratinocytes, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells can undergo this process. immunohistochemistry of skin lesion biopsies can reveal intraepidermal, intrafollicular, intravascular, interstitial, and perivascular neutrophils, t-cell infiltrates, cytotoxic t cells, and macrophages. the pathophysiology of mpox infection drafts two viremias. during primary viremia, the virus replicates at the site of infection and spreads to the lymph nodes, leading to submandibular, cervical, or inguinal lymphadenopathy. after secondary viremia, the virus disseminates to organs through the bloodstream. the virus variant significantly affects disease manifestation. in clade of mpox, the virus replicates in the respiratory epithelium during the incubation period before spreading to lymphoid organs such as the spleen and liver and then can be detected in the blood after the incubation period. but primate models, infected by clade exhibited that the replication of virus befalls in just cutaneous and lymphoid system. this is why the clade of mpox has higher pathogenicity. the replication cycle of the mpox virus begins with the virus entering the host cell via micropinocytosis or direct fusion with the plasma membrane. crucial for the attachment of the virion are key components such as exterior virion proteins, surface glycosaminoglycans, and extracellular matrix elements. upon entry, the virus damages its outer membrane, releasing its core into the cytoplasm for uncoating. early gene expression generates essential early proteins, such as intermediate transcription factors, dna polymerase, and rna polymerase, required for viral replication and immune response control. the virus's dna replicates within specialized areas of the cytoplasm, producing multiple copies of the viral genome. the virus synthesizes the intermediate proteins and late transcription factors to produce immature virions and then mature to become mature virions. the golgi apparatus transports some mvs, envelops them, and transforms them into wrapped virions. wv is carried to the cell's outside edge, either discharged as extracellular virions or remained as cell-associated enveloped virions for cell transmission. cell lysis can also release mvs, facilitating their transfer from one host to another. this process facilitates effective duplication and dissemination, resulting in observable clinical manifestations such as skin rash and swelling of the lymph nodes. figure illustrates this process in detail, providing a more precise understanding. .. immune response the immune response to human mpox infection involves both innate and adaptive immunity. the innate immune system is triggered in response to viral infections. this activation occurs mainly through the release of proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-and interferons by dendritic cells, natural killer cells, and macrophages. these cytokines serve to signal and attract more immune cells to the site of infection. this coordinated immune response aims to contain and eliminate the pathogen, ensuring a thorough and efficient defense. both cd4+ and cd8+ cytotoxic t cells are activated by mhc class i antigens from macrophages and dendritic cells. cd4 t cells help b cells become plasma cells that secrete antibodies. cd8+ t cells activated by interleukins, granzyme b, and perforin become more cytotoxic. this synchronized response kills virus-infected cells and provides a strong resistance against viral infections. toll-like receptors, nod-like receptors, c-type lectin receptors, and rig--like receptors are pattern recognition receptors that play a crucial role in the innate immune system. they are responsible for identifying a wide range of molecules associated with damaged cells. upon the activation of prps, a series of processes are initiated, resulting in the activation of transcription factors associated with inflammation, such as nuclear factor-kappa b and inf regulatory factors. on the other hand, the virus has effective ways to dodge the immune system. a47r is a protein produced by mpox that can interact with intracellular adaptors of tlrs and suppress the upregulation of nf-κb expression, which leads to the inhibition of apoptosis regulating via interaction with the iκb kinase complex that is necessary for the activation of nf-κb and has a critical role in control of programmed cell death. mpox employs soluble cytokines to evade the immune system. these cytokines competitively bind to the immune system's cytokines, hindering the expression of antiviral genes and facilitating viral replication. this is achieved by disrupting the activated downstream signaling pathway when cytokine receptors are occupied. additionally, mpox downregulates the expression of mhc-on infected cells and secretes proteins that can target immune molecules such as il-1β, il8, ccl5, and ccl2. while both clade and clade of mpox can produce proteins that mimic bcl-proteins, which play a crucial role in regulating apoptosis, the zaire-i-strain of mpox can encode a protein called p1l that can modulate the apoptosis pathway similar to bcl-. .. transmission mostly by animal-to-human transmission, direct human-to-human transmission through close contact, and indirect human-to-human transmission. ... animal-to-human transmission until the outbreak of mpox in most of the studies were on direct or indirect transmission from infected animals to humans. besides infecting via direct contact with infected animals, the transmission of the infection through respiratory fluids, fomites, and consumption of infected meats is prominent in the disease. while it is not definitively established that rodents are the main reservoir of mpox infection, humans are regarded as incidental hosts in the natural environment. in american giant anteaters at the rotterdam zoo were infected, most likely due to contact with monkeys. in a study of mpox patients, over % of cases in the drc were linked to animal interactions. in unexpected events occurred when exotic rats from ghana, sold as pets, entered the american pet trade. the virus then spread to prairie dogs, leading to human outbreaks as people came in contact with sick animals and their fluids. this transmission occurred primarily through respiratory droplets and saliva. in several african countries, lifestyles include forest living, hunting, bushmeat handling, and even animal's cage cleaning and infected animal biting, which greatly increase the likelihood of animal-to-human transmission of mpox. these activities increase human–wildlife interaction, therefore increasing exposure to possible animal reservoirs and vectors and helping infectious diseases to spread. ... human-to-human transmission unlike animal-to-human infection, human-to-human has a low transmission rate. all healthcare professionals who came into unprotected contact with mpox in a cohort study stayed asymptomatic over the observation period. aside from the possibility of infection spreading through contact with contaminated objects or using the same serving dish as an infected person, direct exposure to respiratory droplets, extended face-to-face interaction, physical contact with affected skin areas, and sexual contact are significant routs of transmitting mpox between humans. in the outbreak, the primary mode of human-to-human transmission appears to be through sexual contact. a study in portugal included male participants, of whom were recognized as msm. likewise, six individuals reported engaging in sexual activity with more than ten. in another observational cohort study that carried out in bichat–claude bernard university hospital in paris on patients, /of them were men engaged in sexual activities with other men. .. clinical manifestations after an asymptomatic latent period of approximately days, individuals infected with mpox exhibit nonspecific prodromal symptoms. these early signs, which precede the characteristic skin lesions, include fever, pruritus, and swollen painful lymph nodes in the submandibular, cervical, and inguinal regions—crucial for differentiating mpox from smallpox or chickenpox. typical symptoms within a % ci are fatigue, sore throat, difficulty swallowing, headache, backache, cough, photophobia, shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. skin lesions, usually –mm in size, start on the trunk and face and spread centrifugally to peripheral organs such as the palms and soles about –days after the prodromal phase. they progress from macular rashes to maculopapular, vesicular, and pustular stages and form crusts and scabs within one to two weeks. lymphadenopathy remains due to the virus's strong immune response. a thorough assessment examining cases before and after the outbreak found that more than lesions were observed in almost % of the patients. simultaneously with the emergence of skin lesions, lesions also arise in the oral and vaginal regions. it is advised to practice isolation during the initial week of the rash, as the patient is considered contagious until the scabs separate and the throat swab pcr findings show no signs of infection. immunocompromised and pregnant individuals are more prone to experiencing complications of the condition. these complications include secondary bacterial soft tissue infection, hemorrhagic pustules, pneumonia, and encephalitis. mpox can be passed from mother to fetus during delivery in pregnant women, potentially resulting in spontaneous miscarriage occurring –days after the onset of fever. a stillborn fetus may display maculopapular lesions, hepatomegaly, and hydrops fetalis. postnatal transmission can also happen through close contact while breastfeeding, comparable to the transmission of varicella zoster and herpes simplex viruses. however, the clinical manifestations differed slightly during the outbreak. several cases exhibited a solitary cutaneous lesion, predominantly localized in the anogenital region, and frequently initiated its development in that area. the lesions were frequently characterized by discomfort and did not exhibit the previously reported tendency to spread to other locations. more research is needed to understand the increased sexual transmission of clade of the virus and its genetic characteristics. furthermore, in certain instances, cutaneous lesions manifested prior to the commencement of fever. nevertheless, a significant majority of participants in a cohort study conducted in spain experienced systemic symptoms before the appearance of a rash. as summarized in table fever was reported in %–% of patients across different studies, with lymph node swelling being a notable feature in %–% of cases, distinguishing mpox from other orthopoxvirus infections. skin lesions displayed a significant regional variation. genital lesions were the most common, affecting up to % of patients in spain, portugal, and canada, as noted by tarin-vicente et al. and sousa et al.. in the united kingdom and germany, facial and trunk lesions were more prevalent, with rates between % and %. these differences highlight the need for tailored diagnostic approaches. table shows that affected individuals typically have a median age of –years, with a notable prevalence among msm in urban areas. additionally, hiv coinfection rates ranged from % to %, indicating a need for integrated care for high-risk populations .. complications mpox infections can lead to both neurological and psychosocial consequences. according to a nigerian study conducted in % of patients who were admitted to the hospital exhibited psychiatric symptoms, including anxiety, despair, low mood, and suicidal thoughts. distinguishing these psychological symptoms from those caused by hospitalization and quarantine presents a considerable challenge. neurological issues such as seizures, disorientation, and encephalitis have been seen in individuals with mpox during the outbreak, with prevalence rates of .%, .%, and respectively. moreover, brain magnetic resonance imaging scans of patients with acute disseminated encephalomyelitis who have received vaccinations reveal normal levels of viruses and detectable specific mpox igm antibodies in the analysis of cerebrospinal fluid. during the outbreak in the united states, two individuals with weakened immune systems developed encephalomyelitis –days after experiencing initial symptoms. in the cases of systemic mpox infection, the lack of viral nucleic acid in the csf, elevated csf protein levels, and pleocytosis indicate autoimmune responses rather than viral invasion. mri scans showed brain and spinal lesions in patients and which suggests mpox-related proctitis in patient . mpox virus causes ocular symptoms in unvaccinated and immunosuppressed people. eye rashes, conjunctivitis, redness, discomfort, and discharge, conjunctival ulceration, lesions, and eyelid pustules and pseudopustules are given by pooled prevalence. severe infections can lead to complications such as myocarditis, epiglottitis, peritonsillar abscess, rectal wall rupture, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, bronchopneumonia, and necrotizing pneumonia. the immune response to viral fragments impacting the myocardium can cause myocarditis or pericarditis. this phenomenon can also be observed following the administration of the smallpox vaccine. a review study conducted in on myocarditis caused by mpox infection found that all cases of myocarditis were accompanied by chest pain and difficulty breathing. electrocardiographic tests showed st-elevation in % of patients and sinus tachycardia in % of patients. echocardiographic findings indicated a decrease in the ejection fraction in % of patients, with an average ejection fraction of .%. cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed gadolinium enhancement and edema in % of the cases examined. there have been reports of bronchopneumonia and necrotizing pneumonia in humans infected with mpox. one case involved a -year-old man who had hiv, tertiary syphilis, cryptosporidiosis, and kaposi's sarcoma. chest radiography showed progressive bilateral nodules, and he developed necrotizing pneumonia as a result of the mpox infection. unfortunately, he died from pseudomonas sepsis on the 28th day of the infection. the icu admission of a -year-old caucasian french woman revealed the presence of acute respiratory distress syndrome, characterized by symptoms such as fever, hypotension, decreased oxygen saturation, and mental abnormalities. the pcr test confirmed that she was infected with mpox, and the culture of her pleural fluid showed the presence of streptococcus pyogenes. the high-resolution computed tomography scans showed significant bilateral consolidation in this case. .. treatment given the self-limiting nature of mpox in most cases, conventional antiviral treatment is often unnecessary since many patients can recover with supportive care alone. to reduce the risk of drug resistance and ensure the effectiveness of antiviral drugs, it is essential to limit their use to severe cases or patients at high risk of serious consequences and death, such as those with weakened immune systems due to hiv or chemotherapy with alkylating drugs. supportive care management: behavior, local, and systemic treatments are used to cure mpox. avoid contact lenses, use trifluridine or mineral oils on the eyes for pain and lubrication, apply lidocaine gel to moderate skin lesions, and use a cream with amitriptyline %, ketamine %, and baclofen % for painful anogenital lesions. nsaids are also given systemically to ease pain. it is advised to cover mpox cutaneous lesions to stop the disease from spreading directly through them and to gently wash them with soap and water in order to treat mpox dermal lesions optimally. patients should also avoid scratching lesions to prevent infection and spread. antiviral treatment: the lack of specific antiviral mpox drugs necessitates using tecovirimat and cdv, which were initially approved for other uses. understanding the virus's structure and critical proteins is crucial for developing targeted antiviral therapies. tecovirimat, also known as tpoxx®, is an antiviral medication specifically developed to inhibit the vp37 protein, which is produced by the f13l gene. this gene is responsible for conferring resistance to bcv in orthopoxviruses, including vaccinia and mpox. this protein is crucial for creating extracellular enveloped virions by assisting in encasing intracellular mvs with the lipid membrane of the host cell. tecovirimat inhibits the development of mvs that can leave the cell and disseminate the virus by binding to vp37 and blocking its interactions with gtpase, rab9, and tip47, thus restricting the infection. this antiviral medication was authorized by the fda in . it is offered in two dosage forms: a -mg oral capsule taken twice a day and a -mg intravenous infusion also taken twice a day. this treatment is the principal treatment for severe instances of mpox and individuals at high risk of severe disease, such as those with a weakened immune system and asplenia, or who are receiving alkylating drugs. significantly, the oral formulation demonstrates increased absorption when consumed with food in a fed condition. however, the efficacy of this drug can be compromised by resistance due to a mutation at amino acid position . in a report, .% of patients receiving tecovirimat intravenously experienced at least one adverse effect. the most common were pain at the infusion site, swelling, and erythema. headaches and dizziness were also reported by .% and % of patients, respectively. other side effects such as myalgia, back pain, diarrhea, and photophobia were rare, occurring in less than % of cases. no renal dose adjustment needed in the capsule formulation of tecovirimat, while its iv formulation is contraindicated in crcl below ml/min due to b-cyclodextrin existence in formulation. prairie dogs, macaque monkeys, and cynomolgus monkeys are the examples of tecovirimat's therapeutic applications. in a study, prairie dogs infected with the congo basin clade were administered intranasally with tecovirimat, and it was celebrated that % of cases improved and became asymptomatic without any instances of death. before that, in a study, intravenous administration of tecovirimat at a dose of mg/kg/day, three days postinfection, established a zero percent mortality rate in cynomolgus monkeys infected with the west african clade. it is also worth mentioning that there are no reports of fetal toxicity regarding this medicine. cdv, also known by its iupac designation oxymethylphosphonic acid, is a pharmaceutical compound that acts as a cytosine nucleotide analog and inhibits the activity of dna polymerase. it has been granted approval by the fda for the treatment of cytomegalovirus retinitis in individuals who are infected with hiv. upon cellular uptake, cdv undergoes phosphorylation by the host cell's enzyme, resulting in the formation of cdv diphosphate, which is its active form. this active form affects the elongation of the dna chain during replication by competitively limiting the inclusion of deoxycytidine triphosphate. due to inadequate absorption in the gastrointestinal tract, pharmacists were compelled to produce an intravenous dosage form with a recommended dose of mg/kg once weekly for the treatment of mpox infection. the most significant adverse effect of cdv is nephrotoxicity, which is dose-dependent. this is characterized by the presence of proteinuria followed by glucosuria, an increase in the blood creatinine level, and a decrease in the serum bicarbonate concentration. additional documented adverse effects comprise neutropenia, ocular hypotony, iritis, uveitis, and pyrexia. misuse of different antimicrobial medications may lead to the development of drug-resistant strains in the same group of microorganisms. the susceptibility of the mpox virus to resistance is a significant trouble. the emergence of cdv-resistant species among orthopoxviruses, including mpox, complicates the situation further. the rise of cdv-resistant orthopoxviruses, such as smallpox, vaccinia, and mpox, presents a major health risk due to specific mutations found in the e9l and f13l genes of vaccinia virus. similar genetic variations, specifically a314v and a684t, have also been observed in mpox virus. these genetic changes result in reduced ability to cause disease and replicate efficiently, requiring ongoing monitoring of the genome, the creation of different treatment options, and additional investigation into the specific molecular processes and adaptability of resistant strains. in the fda-approved bcv for treating smallpox. this medication enhances the lipophilicity and cellular permeability of cdv by including a hexadecyloxypropyl group. this anti-dsdna virus drug hydrolyzes to cdv after entering into host's cells and is then phosphorylated to cvd-pp to the inhibition of dna replication. the coadministration of tecovirimat with bcv can reduce the effective concentration of the latter. bcv has a long half-life similar to cdv but with reduced nephrotoxicity due to its lipophilicity. additionally, bcv has significant concentrations in the lungs, spleen, and liver. bcv has the potential to raise liver enzyme levels, particularly alanine aminotransferase, and raise bilirubin levels, which can cause damage to liver cells. the fasting state reduces bcv's orally absorption and plasma concentration. bcv is not a recommended drug for pregnant or breastfeeding women. table compares therapeutic agents for mpox, including their mechanisms of action, pharmacokinetics, adverse effects, and safety profiles. tecovirimat is versatile and safe for various populations, while bcv requires hepatic monitoring, and cdv demands renal precautions. this analysis aids clinicians in tailoring treatments based on patient-specific needs and contraindications. immunoglobulin therapy involves the administration of antibodies to enhance the immune response against specific pathogens. the cdc recommends vaccinia immune globulin intravenous for the treatment of orthopoxviruses infections, and it has received fda approval in for managing complications associated with vaccinia vaccination. derived from the plasma of healthy donors, this treatment involves aggregated polyclonal immunoglobulin and has shown cross-neutralization activity against the mpox virus in a macaca mulatta model infected with the cb clade of mpox, effectively inhibiting the virus from infecting additional cells, as depicted in figure . imatinib, a drug primarily used for chronic myeloid leukemia, has shown potential as an antiviral agent by disrupting actin dynamics and preventing viral egress. this could reduce the spread of the virus by inhibiting the release of eevs. other medications have shown effectiveness against mpox besides imatinib. in a experiment, resveratrol, found in plants such as grapes, peanuts, and blueberries, hindered virus reproduction by disrupting dna synthesis. ribavirin, a medication commonly used to treat hepatitis c, has also shown effectiveness against mpox and other orthopoxviruses infections. in infected cells treated with recombinant inf-beta, the antiviral protein myxovirus resistance protein a was induced, and it was exhibited that the continuous expression of mxa inhibits mpox infection. further investigations have been carried out to find out the antiviral properties of recombinant beta inf against the mpox virus. for numerous infectious diseases, including mpox infection, new medication formulations and techniques of administration are in development. a striking example comes from a study on a poly core-enclosed tpe-bt-dptq. we further refined the core, combined it, and extruded it under a macrophage membrane. we recovered the membrane by means of mechanical fragmentation, ultracentrifugation, and hypotonic lysis among other techniques. the result of this technique was the final biomimetic nanoparticles, sometimes referred to as tbd@m nps. in this work, photothermal bnps administered to mice infected with mpox produced a notable reduction in viral titers within the lesions, accelerated healing of the lesions, and effective inhibition of viral transmission. .. vaccination because orthopoxviruses share genetic similarities, the immune response to one can help protect against others. smallpox vaccines can prevent mpox. there are three generations of vaccines against smallpox. the most significant of the first generation of these vaccines, which successfully prevented person-to-person transmission in africa, is dryvax®. the production of dryvax® was discontinued in the united states in after million doses had been produced. other first-generation vaccines utilizing a live-unattenuated platform, which are no longer licensed, include lister-based vaccines and the new york city board of health. acam2000®, a second-generation vaccine developed by emergent biosolutions, is a live-attenuated, replication-competent vaccinia virus in lyophilized form. after receiving fda approval in this vaccine was introduced as an alternative to dryvax® and approved for –-year-old individuals, exhibiting similar safety profiles and complications, including progressive vaccinia, eczema vaccinatum, and encephalitis. acam2000®, administered for postexposure prophylaxis with a bifurcated needle, provides peak protection days after vaccination, with reimmunization advised every three years for high-risk exposures and every years for less virulent strains like cowpox. immunosuppressed populations, such as those suffering from leukemia, lymphoma, hiv infection, patients with metastatic malignancies, transplant recipients, and undergoing cancer chemotherapy and radiotherapy individuals or taking corticosteroids with a dose of ≥ mg/kg for ≥ weeks and tnf inhibitors, are in a group for whom this vaccine is not recommended. having cardiac risk factors such as diabetes, smoking, hypertension, or hyperlipidemia is a contraindication for acam2000® due to the high risk of myopericarditis, which can present with symptoms such as dyspnea, chest pain, palpitations, and ecg abnormalities in these individuals. unlike acam2000®, which is derived from a clonal isolate of dryvax, lc16m8 is a third-generation vaccine derived from the first-generation lister strain incorporating a deletion in the b5r immunogenic membrane protein, produced in cell culture using rabbit kidney cells. this minimally replicating vaccinia virus vaccine has demonstrated effectiveness in postexposure prophylaxis when administered within –days after close contact, regardless of prior smallpox vaccination, and it is the only vaccine authorized for use in children among the three mpox vaccines. another third-generation vaccine, modified vaccinia ankara, branded as imvanex® and jynneos®, has demonstrated adequate cellular and humoral immunity in animal models. the vaccine is administered intradermally in two doses, specifically on day and day by fda guidelines. this vaccine is exceptionally safe for individuals with compromised immune systems, as it does not use live viruses, significantly reducing the risk of infection. in recent years, mrna-based vaccines have been developed and introduced as novel vaccines, with high efficacy in triggering both humoral and cellular immune responses and with faster production against tumor cells and viruses. self-amplifying rna and nonreplicating mrna vaccines are two types of rna vaccines. sarna vaccines contain the code for both the target antigen and a replicase complex, while nonreplicating vaccines contain the code for only the target antigen. in addition to viral infections, the applications of sarna vaccines have expanded to include bacterial infections, parasitic infections, and cancers. the mpox is a new target for this novel vaccine technology. for instance, in sang and colleagues' study, the immunogenicity of an mpox virus quadrivalent mrna vaccine, which was prepared using a29l, a35r, m1r, and b6r as antigen targets, was evaluated in mice. as a result, they observed a strong cellular and memory cell immune response against mpox without any significant rise in inflammatory cytokines or histopathological changes in the mice. a multiepitope-based vaccine is another novel approach against mpox, which shantier and coworkers have developed. this safe, innovative vaccine elicits an immune response against the mpox by utilizing cell surface binding proteins, without causing side effects. .. ai and mpox deep learning is a specific branch of machine learning that falls within the broader field of ai. it is distinguished by its capacity to utilize neural networks with numerous layers to identify and represent intricate patterns in large datasets. dl has gained significant recognition for its revolutionary applications in the field of medical science. significantly, it aids in the identification of illnesses by allowing the examination of various imaging techniques, spanning from basic skin pictures to advanced diagnostic instruments such as ct scans and mris, largely utilizing convolutional neural networks. furthermore, dl plays a crucial role in the detection of pathogens via genomic sequencing. utilizing recurrent neural networks improve diagnostic accuracy. recent research on highly transmissible infectious diseases like mpox has focused on dl to examine skin lesions and detect them early. in a study, mobilenetv2 showed the highest accuracy at .% in binary classification with a sample size of . vgg16 and vgg19 are cnn models trained on imagenet, while resnet50 and resnet101 are residual networks. the vision transformer, introduced by dosovitskiy et al., is a pretrained model for image classification that treats images as sequences of patches processed by a transformer encoder, with a multilayer perceptron normalizer, multihead attention mechanism, and embedded patches forming its architecture. this new model has uses outside the ones described. in a study by chaturvedi et al. on the epidemiological and behavioral elements influencing mpox transmission, it was proposed that, much as with smallpox vaccination, variations in transmission probability—whether sexual or nonsexual—had a significant impact on mpox in their model. furthermore, in the absence of pre-exposure vaccination, contact tracing's precision and timeliness proved to be quite important in reducing mpox flow within the model. drug discovery and vaccine production through molecular modeling and virtual screening, personalized treatment aimed at achieving the most therapeutic effect with fewer adverse events, and optimal public health policies are just a few examples of how ai can play a role in medical science. .. policy implications and future research studies policymakers should focus on vaccination campaigns targeting high-risk groups, including healthcare workers, msm, and immunocompromised individuals, particularly in regions with clade 1b cases. establishing genomic surveillance systems is also essential for monitoring mpox strain evolution and enabling proactive health responses. despite progress, gaps remain in mpox research. the long-term efficacy of existing smallpox vaccines against mpox is still unclear, and ai diagnostic tools need real-world validation. the transmission dynamics among msm highlight the importance of understanding demographic factors for effective public health interventions. high rates of hiv coinfection in mpox patients indicate the need for integrated care approaches. future research should prioritize the development of next-generation mpox-specific vaccines, mainly using mrna technologies, and expand the use of ai for outbreak surveillance. addressing transmission's social and behavioral aspects is crucial for reducing stigma and promoting preventive measures. evaluating current public health policies will provide valuable insights for refining strategies for future outbreaks. by addressing these issues and utilizing innovative tools, global health systems can enhance their preparedness and response to mpox and other emerging infectious diseases. . conclusion the covid-pandemic and the mpox outbreak highlighted the urgent need to handle viruses and their potential to cause widespread epidemics and devastation. developing specific treatments and effective vaccinations for viruses such as sars-cov-mpox, zika virus, and ebola can be challenging due to mutations that alter transmission patterns and clinical properties. this review contributes to this field by providing comprehensive data on various aspects of mpox infection. modern medications can be developed with a thorough knowledge of viral structures and the protein and nonprotein components engaged in their pathogenesis and life cycle this knowledge enables the design of drugs against them. many of these structures can be addressed by medications used for different purposes; network pharmacology helps one to find these targets. monoclonal antibodies and new chemical therapies can target these structures. raising public awareness about immunization, preventive measures, and sexual health behaviors is essential, especially for gay individuals and those with multiple sexual partners. combining traditional knowledge of diseases with modern ai technology can help us tackle the challenges of mpox more effectively. policymakers, doctors, and researchers must work together to create strategies that improve preparedness, lower the risks of outbreaks, and enhance patient care. the global health community can strengthen its response to mpox and other emerging infectious diseases by finding and addressing gaps in our current approach.
comprehensive insights into monkeypox: recent advances in epidemiology, diagnostic approaches and therapeutic strategies abstract monkeypox is a viral infection closely related to smallpox, manifesting as a milder febrile rash in affected individuals. over the past two decades, the incidence of mpox has surged, possibly linked to a declining immunity against the smallpox vaccine worldwide. recent outbreaks of mpox in multiple countries have sparked concerns regarding altered transmission patterns and the potential for a global menace. in this article, we present a multidimensional review encompassing the latest scientific discoveries, illuminating the intricate structure of the human mpox virus. key findings include advancements in understanding the virus’s molecular mechanisms, which highlight its genetic adaptability and potential for zoonotic spillover. diagnostic innovations, such as improved molecular assays, have enhanced detection accuracy, while novel therapeutic strategies, including antiviral drugs and vaccines, show promise in mitigating outbreaks. our conclusions emphasize the importance of robust surveillance systems, vaccination programs, and rapid response strategies to curb mpox’s spread. future recommendations include strengthening global collaboration for zoonotic disease surveillance, advancing the research on host–pathogen interactions, and developing next-generation therapeutics to address this emerging public health threat effectively. . introduction monkeypox is a viral disease and an agent of the genus orthopoxvirus. the illness, which is primarily seen in central and west africa, is comparable to smallpox, which was declared extinct in . as a zoonotic virus, the mpox virus most frequently infects humans through contact with rodents and primates that have the disease. fever, chilliness, enlarged lymph nodes, headache, back pain, muscle aches, and fatigue are some of the symptoms of mpox. a rash typically starts on the face before spreading to other body parts. mpox can occasionally result in serious disease and even death, especially in people with weakened immune systems. the world health organization has recommended adding mpox to its list of conditions that could cause a public health emergency of global concern. the disease was identified in humans for the first time in and periodic outbreaks have been noted. it is common in certain parts of central and west africa. uncertainty still exists over the extent of mpox transmission in africa, which may be underreported. in recent years, few cases of mpox have been documented in the united states and the united kingdom, most usually among travelers from the affected african nations. given that the mpox virus is a zoonotic disease, it is crucial that we understand the role that wildlife plays in its maintenance and dissemination. hence, to control and halt the spread of the illness, a study on the epidemiology, ecology, and monitoring of mpox is essential. this review aimed to provide a comprehensive understanding of monkeypox by integrating recent advancements in molecular characterization, epidemiology, clinical manifestations, diagnostic tools, and therapeutic strategies. it aims to offer valuable insights for virology research and public health measures to combat this emerging global health threat. . background and issues mpox was initially identified in research laboratory monkeys in . the virus is frequently found in monkeys and rodents in central and west africa, where mpox has proven to be particularly dangerous in children, with death rates as high as % in severe outbreaks. additionally, infected ”exotic pets” such as enormous, pouched rats, brush-tailed porcupines, and rope squirrels have spread the mpox virus outside africa. the first mpox pandemic outside africa occurred in the united states of america in when a caged prairie dog in milwaukee, wisconsin transmitted the virus to a child. there were a few rare cases recorded in the uk, us, and singapore between and ; in each of them, the underlying index case was a person who had recently left nigeria. the mpox virus can infect humans by animal bites or via direct contact with contaminated human bodily fluids. it can also be spread from person to person by intimate contact, most typically amongst family members; exposure to respiratory droplets may also be a mechanism of transmission. the illness reveals itself in people two weeks after infection, with fever, headache, general malaise and tiredness, and swollen lymph nodes. a few days later, a rash of elevated pimples appears on the face and torso. they eventually crust and fall off, and the illness takes two to four weeks to run its course. outbreaks are kept under control by isolating patients and keeping the environment clean. to prevent infection, jynneos, an attenuated live virus vaccine, can be utilized. smallpox vaccination similarly provides some defense against the mpox virus; smallpox vaccine injection may help prevent persons who are at risk of being infected with the mpox virus, such as veterinarians and other animal workers. a more serious outbreak that included widespread human-to-human spread outside of africa started in . in may the outbreak started in the uk and spread quickly in the months that followed, infecting countries in africa, asia, australia, and the americas. traditionally, mpox was considered a zoonotic disease. nevertheless, many of the reported cases in recent outbreaks have been linked to intimate and sexual contact, particularly among men who have sex with men. this pattern has raised concerns about mpox’s association with sexual health. although mpox is not classified as a sexually transmitted infection, evidence suggests that the virus can be present in bodily fluids, including semen, and transmission during close physical contact is likely. the clustering of cases within sexual networks has highlighted the need for targeted awareness campaigns and interventions within these communities. the sexual health aspect of mpox underscores the importance of reducing stigma, promoting accurate health messaging, and integrating mpox prevention efforts into existing sexual health services. addressing these challenges is crucial to controlling the outbreak and preventing future spread. the who declared the monkeypox outbreak a public health emergency of international concern in late july, after more than cases were reported. in human mpox, which is connected to the smallpox virus, was discovered. the present epidemic in has been puzzling because there is no epidemiological link and there is a risk that the virus might be spread sexually. in addition, the morphological and pathogenetic mechanisms by which the virus enters host cells are poorly understood. however, a recent national multicenter study in spain analyzed the early phase of the mpox outbreak. it included confirmed cases, primarily affecting middle-aged cisgender men, with sexual exposure, especially among men who have sex with men, as the main transmission route. immunosuppression, mostly due to hiv, was observed in % of patients. common symptoms included rash, fever, and adenopathies. co-infections like syphilis, gonorrhea, and hiv was frequent. only .% had prior orthopoxvirus vaccination. treatments were heterogeneous, with most receiving symptomatic care; patients required hospitalization, and died. this highlights the need for targeted public health interventions. this article seeks to summarize what is now known about this re-emerging virus and speed up the understanding of previously published research findings on the human mpox virus. . mpox virus classification the orthopoxvirus genus of the poxviridae family contains the mpox virus, poxviruses are enclosed big viruses; kilobase pairs of double-stranded dna that are heavily loaded with genes make up their genome. around half of the genes are well-evolved in vertebrate poxviruses and are required for viral replication, while the other half are referred to as “accessory” genes that are mostly involved in virus and host interactions and may not be necessary for viral replication independently. many poxviruses infect most invertebrates and vertebrates, affecting a wide range of veterinary and human disorders. the two subfamilies that make up the poxviridae family are entomopoxvirinae, which infects insects, and chordopoxvirinae, which infects vertebrates. one of the genera that make up the subfamily chordopoxvirinae is opv. all opv species are categorized as zoonotic viruses since they all have animal reservoirs except the variola virus, which only affects humans. . mpox genetic clades and evolution experts in virology, evolutionary biology, and councils of research institutes from around the world reviewed the phylogeny and nomenclature of known and unknown mpox virus variations or clades. they discussed the characteristics and evolution of several mpox virus strains, differences in their apparent phylogenetic and clinical composition, and any potential repercussions for virological and evolutionary research, as well as public health in the future. the panel decided on new nomenclature for the virus clades that adheres to professional norms. they reached an agreement on the listing and categorization of virus clades on genomic sequence repository sites. in the proper naming system, the clade will be denoted by a roman number, and the subclades will be denoted by a lower-case alphanumeric character. hence, clade i, clade iia, and clade iib are included in the revised terminology, with clade iib denoting the collection of variants that were primarily in use during the global pandemic of . lineages will be given the names that the experts have suggested as the pandemic progresses. if further time is required, the experts will convene. the new names for the clades should go into force immediately, while work on the names of the diseases and viruses continues. different strains of the monkeypox virus exhibit genetic polymorphism and genomic instability, contributing to strain evolution. mpxv is a dna virus that undergoes frequent mutations, enabling its rapid spread. the emergence of well-adapted variants can have devastating global consequences. minor genetic changes facilitate host adaptation, with moderate transmission rates being more common. genetic mutations, both stabilizing and destabilizing, enhance viral fitness and support interhuman transmission. different strains of mpxv exhibit variations in their genome sizes, ranging from to base pairs. these strains are classified into two clades: west african and congo basin. through epidemiological studies, researchers have observed differences in the severity of mpx infection in various regions. by comparing three west african strains with a central african strain, it was found that there is a nucleotide variance of approximately .% to .%. the primary distinctions between these strains lie in the orthologs of the br-203c, br-and cop-c3l genes. the br-gene, for instance, encodes a complete protein comprising amino acids. curiously, the west african strain of mpxv encodes only a partial n-terminal fragment, consisting of approximately amino acids, for the specific gene under investigation. intriguingly, this gene is an ortholog of the m-t4 gene that exists in the myxoma virus. the myxoma virus is notorious for causing myxomatosis, a disease affecting european rabbits. intriguingly, scientific studies have shown that deleting the m-t4 gene results in a heightened inflammatory response. this finding suggests that this gene regulates the immune response to viral infections. br-acts as an il-1β-binding protein, preventing the binding of il-1β to the il-receptor. the cytokine il-present in forms of the il-1α, il-1β, and il-receptor antagonist, affects the inflammatory response. one of these mechanisms involves the production of vil-1βbp. by binding to il-1β, vil-1βbp prevents il-1β from interacting with its cellular receptors, inhibiting its signaling and dampening the immune response. the cop-c3l gene in the vaccinia virus codes for a secreted protein called vaccinia virus cop. the central african strain of mpxv expresses a shorter protein known as the mpx inhibitor of complement enzymes, which is the ortholog of the cop-c3l gene. the variola virus, responsible for smallpox, contains the ortholog known as the smallpox inhibitor of complement enzymes. mpxv strains exhibit genetic diversity, with the congo basin clades being more severe and associated with human infections worldwide. understanding the roles of these genes in mpxv pathogenesis is essential for comprehending the complex interactions and their contributions to the virus’s disease-causing mechanisms. the outbreak of mpxv is associated with a divergent branch, referred to as lineage b.which is derived from lineage a.. lineage a.has been associated with mpxv exports from nigeria to the united kingdom, israel, and singapore in –. the mpxv outbreak may be attributed to the ongoing spread and evolution of the virus from the –nigeria outbreak. poxviruses, including mpxv, have a lower mutation rate compared to rna viruses. however, the mpxv shows a rapid divergence from the virus, suggesting a rapid adaptation to its host. apobec3 editing contributes to the mutation rate, with % of new nucleotide changes due to this process. recombination plays a crucial role in poxvirus evolution, with the first natural recombination event in mpxv. gene loss and amplification are important factors in mpxv’s evolution, with the west african clade having larger genomes and more gene content. monitoring non-synonymous mutations, genome ends, and gene content is crucial for understanding the evolutionary dynamics and possible adaptations of mpxv. the mpox virus’s development and transmission are influenced by point mutations in several proteins, leading to the multi-country outbreak in . the virus originated from the mpxv/united states//md virus and has evolved through ten common amino acid alterations. the b.viruses, which were transferred from nigeria between and have specific amino acid changes in of the proteins. the study also examined characteristics of codon use and host adaptability, revealing a bias in codon use in genes undergoing nucleotide alterations in the b.lineage. selection pressure, rather than mutation pressure, played a significant role in the evolution of genes expressing nucleotide mutations in the b.lineage. monitoring and analyzing the virus’s genetic alterations is crucial for improving our understanding of its behavior and guiding effective preventative and control efforts. . mpox epidemiology sub-saharan africa has possibly seen mpox for several thousands of years since humans initially contracted the virus via close contact with diseased animals. mpox was recognized as a distinct sickness after smallpox was eradicated in and it became clear that smallpox-like infections were still happening in rural areas. the mpox virus was first discovered in monkeys used for research in at state serum institutes in copenhagen, denmark, and africa. mpox has received attention as a disease of significant global public health concern since the outbreak of the first epidemic in the usa in which was linked with infected pet prairie dogs. it was assumed that the native prairie dogs housed with imported rodents from ghana in the western region of africa were the primary source of the outbreak because the bulk of the affected people became ill after interacting with pet prairie dogs. mpox has been connected to a rise in cases that began in the midwest of the us in the summer of . mpox cases have been reported in several countries since with the worst epidemic occurring in nigeria in . the centres for disease control and prevention had reported instances of mpox as of july spread over different nations. figure shows the geographical distribution of the cases worldwide. currently, the western hemisphere and parts of europe are home to the majority of mpox cases. according to recent studies, the united kingdom has the most instances in all of europe. with a median age of years, most cases reported of mpox currently involve people under the age of . this group only emerged after the smallpox vaccination campaign had been abandoned, further illuminating the lack of cross-protective immunity. according to the external situation report issued on june the world health organization received reports of laboratory-confirmed cases of mpox from countries across all six who regions between january and june . this totals deaths. since the last situation update, new cases and new fatalities have been reported. the number of new cases worldwide fell somewhat in the most recent reporting week. the americas have recorded the most cases in the last three weeks. cases have increased in several countries, including cameroon. europe and south-east asia have also reported additional cases, but with some delay. the number of cases in africa has dramatically grown, exceeding the previously recorded average. as of june nations had confirmed new cases within the maximum illness incubation time. the united states, brazil, and spain are among the countries with the most cumulative instances. these countries account for .% of all instances globally. since january african countries have reported mpox outbreaks, with a total of cases, including confirmed and suspected cases. the outbreak has resulted in deaths, leading to a case fatality ratio of .%. the affected countries include burundi, cameroon, the central african republic, the republic of the congo, côte d’ivoire, the democratic republic of the congo, ghana, kenya, liberia, nigeria, rwanda, south africa, and uganda. on august sweden confirmed its first case of mpox clade i, with the infection traced to a region in africa experiencing a significant outbreak of this variant. this case marked the first recorded instance of clade i mpox outside of africa. as of august the democratic republic of the congo has reported a total of mpox cases, including confirmed and suspected cases, with fatalities, resulting in a case fatality ratio of .%. the outbreak has spread across all provinces, predominantly affecting males and children under years of age. the persistence of widespread transmission emphasizes the need for targeted interventions, particularly in vulnerable groups and high-risk regions. burundi officially declared a mpox outbreak on july . by august the country had reported cases, comprising confirmed and suspected cases, with no fatalities. the mpox clade ib variant was identified in confirmed cases. among those affected, % were males, and children under five years old made up % of the confirmed cases. the outbreak has spread to out of the districts, highlighting the need for focused public health measures and surveillance. by august a total of cases had been reported in the central african republic, including confirmed and suspected cases, with no deaths. the outbreak affected six out of the country’s seven health regions, with % of cases occurring in males. additionally, a significant proportion of cases were among children under five years of age, indicating the virus’s impact on vulnerable populations. rwanda declared its first mpox outbreak on july . as of august the country had reported four confirmed cases with no associated deaths. this marks the first occurrence of mpox transmission in rwanda, prompting health authorities to implement response measures to contain the spread and prevent further cases. as of august nigeria’s ministry of health reported nine confirmed mpox cases with no deaths. the outbreak affected six of the country’s seven health regions, with the majority of cases occurring in males. additionally, % of the cases involved children under the age of indicating a significant impact on young populations. the monkeypox outbreak continues, with low levels of transmission in europe and the americas, a minor decline in the western pacific, and an increase in cases in south-east asia. the number of cases has recently increased in africa, where transmission is more constant. most patients are men, and the age distribution is consistent. children make up a minor fraction of cases, with the majority being recorded in the americas region. transmission occurs largely among homosexual, bisexual, and other males who have intercourse with other men. the predominant mechanism of transmission is through skin and mucosal contact during sex, followed by non-sexual contact between people. the most typically reported exposure contexts are parties involving sexual interaction; however, this is changing with time. rash, fever, systemic rash, and vaginal rash are all common symptoms. however, reliable information on transmission and exposure settings is scarce in the who african region, making it difficult to gain thorough knowledge of the virus’s spread there. . viral re-emergence of mpox on may portugal, spain, and canada reported and cases of mpv infection, respectively. on may belgium, sweden, and italy confirmed their first mpv instances. on may, australia reported two incidents. on may france, and germany, as well as the netherlands all reported their first cases. on may, the uk’s health secretary revealed an additional mpv cases, bringing the total to . the first nation to impose a -day mpv quarantine requirement was belgium. on may israel and switzerland both verified their initial instances. on may spain confirmed the very first case. the republic of spain reportedly reported a spike in cases, at on june, bringing the overall number of cases to . denmark’s first incidence was reported on may. this was said to be a visitor who had just arrived from the canary islands. on may quebec in canada reported the confirmation of instances; the same day, the czech republic also announced the confirmation of one case. in belgium, the putative offender attended a concert event. the country’s first confirmed case was a -year-old tourist from west africa who visited the united arab emirates at the end of may. slovenia also verified its initial incident. we found that nations reported mpv cases as of january . the origin of the present mpv outbreak, nevertheless, is yet unknown. according to the mpv’s changing nature, it may be transmitted from person to person or from animal to person. travelers from the endemic areas of africa to north america and europe were the ones who initially contracted the illnesses, which subsequently spread. the resurgence of mpox has led to debate, with declining immunity being a major theory. the theory is that waning immunity from previous smallpox vaccinations, which conferred some cross-immunity to mpxv, contributed to the rise in mpox cases. in the 1980s, the cessation of widespread smallpox vaccination made the population more susceptible to mpox, leading to selection pressure on the virus. this selection pressure may have triggered the development of mechanisms to bypass the immune system in mpxv, increasing the transmissibility of the virus. a second theory suggests that nonsynonymous mutations, particularly in coding regions associated with host recognition elements, may facilitate virus adaptation and fitness. these mutations could help the virus evade host immune responses and increase its transmission potential. because of its affiliation with this phylogenetic branch, the emergence of specific mutations in the genomes of lineage b.mpxv compared with related viruses has attracted considerable attention in –. these mutations suggest accelerated microevolutionary processes that could lead to an increase in human-to-human transmission. the b.mpxv lineage responsible for the current pandemic on the european continent probably first appeared in march . this finding suggests that the b.lineage evolved and spread in europe, resulting in the first mpxv cases that later spread to other continents, such as oceania and the americas. recent analyses also indicate that mpxv has adapted more rapidly in the last two years, suggesting an accelerated process of host adaptation. these results provide evidence for the adaptability of mpxv and its dynamics in human populations. the proposed theories offer possible explanations for the resurgence of mpox cases and highlight the importance of monitoring and understanding the evolution of the virus and transmission patterns to support public health. . mpox virus transmission the mpox virus spreads to and between humans when a person comes into proximity to an infected animal, individual, or objects that are contaminated. in addition to moving in large airborne droplets that invade the body via the mouth, eyes, or nose, the virus can also enter via damaged skin. for efficient human-to-human transmission, continuous contact is essential since these droplets are dense and seldom move more than a few feet. as an outcome, healthcare personnel and those who live in the same household as an infected person are more vulnerable. among the outbreak, mpox cases have indeed been concentrated in males who have had sex with men. although infectious mpxv has been found in sperm, mpxv dna has recently been detected in urine, feces, rectal swab, nasopharyngeal swab, and saliva. however, it is unknown whether the virus may infect sperm cells and reproduce in the genital canal. it is still unknown and under inquiry whether mpox may be spread especially via sexual transmission methods. in any case, many are speculating if the virus has mutated to make easier human-to-human transmission possible, similar to sars-cov-in light of this pattern of transmission and the emergence of mpox in non-endemic locations. mpox is less likely to inherit changes that speed up its spread since it is a dna virus, which can detect and correct mutations effectively than rna viruses such as sars-cov-. . mpox virus morphology the mpox virus, along with other poxviruses, is one of the biggest and most complicated illnesses. the mpox virus is large enough to be visible under a fluorescence microscope and has an ultrastructure that can be viewed under an electron microscope. these are brick-like particles with widths ranging from nm to nm with an average particle size of nm to nm. hence, to differentiate the ultrastructure, the stronger amplification afforded by electron microscopy is required. the core, lateral bodies, outer membrane, and outer lipoprotein envelope are the four basic components of the orthopox virion. the center core, encircled by a dense layer of rod-shaped structures known as the palisade layer, contains the viral double-stranded dna and core fibrils. the palisade layer, lateral bodies, and central core are enclosed by the outer membrane, which is composed of many surface tubules. in contrast to virions released by cellular rupture, spontaneously generated virions typically contain the outer lipoprotein membrane. a mature virion seems to have around viral proteins. . mpox virus genome one of the largest viral genomes, the mpox genome is a gigantic kb single linear dsdna molecule. a collection of brief tandem repeats, terminal hairpin loops, and identical but oppositely oriented terminal reads of around kbp are present at every end of the genome. about non-overlapping open-reading frames, each containing or perhaps more amino acid residues, make up the genome. the inverted terminal repeats exhibit of these . mpox virus dna contains only around .% guanine and cytosine. mpox virus has two separate genetic clades, the west african clade as well as the central african clade. it consists of inverted terminal repeats of kb at either end. genes are densely packed; intergenic areas longer than bp are uncommon. the center conserved area contains genes that perform” housekeeping” functions like transcription, replication, and virion assembly. the genes expressed in the terminal sections of poxviruses differ from one another and encode proteins implicated in the host range and pathogenicity. deep sequencing technology advancements have offered important insights into the standing nucleotide variation inherent in poxvirus populations. these variants were previously unappreciated but are now recognized as major contributors to poxvirus evolution. furthermore, there is increasing knowledge of the role that genomic architectural alterations play in determining poxvirus evolution. key drivers of genomic architectural alterations in poxviruses have been identified as homologous and non-homologous recombination, gene duplications, gene loss, and horizontal gene transfer. a recent study found a higher-than-expected incidence of snv accumulation in recent samples of mpxv. seven snvs have been seen since the initial epidemic in march with a total of fifty snvs discovered since . the increased rate of snv acquisition in recent mpxv isolates may be due to the host adaptability, effective population size, and selection coefficient. selective sweeps or bottlenecks within individuals or during transmission may limit the accumulated diversity, leading to disparities between epidemiological isolates and phylogenetic data. the intergenic region of mpxv has been observed to expand or decrease, with varying clades having varying itr lengths. variants in the z-encoding region of the virus, such as the e3l gene, have been found, potentially affecting pkr. microsatellite variants, particularly the a26 ortholog, contribute to genetic variability and influence virus–host interactions. overall, the data highlight the complexities of poxvirus evolution and the various pathways involved in producing genetic variation within poxvirus populations. . mpox virus replication cycle poxvirus replication is distinct from that of other dna viruses in that it occurs in the cytoplasm of the host cell. poxviruses enter cells by an intricate mechanism that includes an attachment, hemi fusion, and core penetration within the plasma membrane, or via endocytosis. the specific method that poxviruses employ to enter cells is determined by their infectious form, which may either be a mature virion through one outer membrane or an extracellular enveloped virion with a different protein composition. in the ev form, the membrane that is particularly ev-specific is eliminated, preserving the underlying membrane affixed to the cell. ev is more specialized for cell-to-cell transmission despite mv’s greater prevalence because of its long, mobile projections made by the polymerization of actin which adheres to the cell’s surface. when a mature virion enters a cell, it loses its protective coating. once within the cell’s cytoplasm, the virus releases ready-made enzymes and certain other enzymatic components that weaken the cell’s defenses and start the synthesis of its original genes. then, the early messenger rna is made via the viral dna-dependent polymerase. the uncoating process that follows dna replication and the creation of intermediary transcriptional regulators are both supported by early mrna translation. the intermediate mrna is then translated and expressed in late mrnas, where it is converted into structural and non-structural proteins. then, translated proteins and dna concatemers generated during the initial stages of replication are assembled. they then transform, becoming immature virions, which mature into intracellular viruses. since imvs are devoid of an outer membrane, they can only spread when cells are damaged. intracellular enveloped virions are formed from imv particles that do not wrap completely in the cytoplasmic protein matrix. these cells are aided in reaching the cell membrane by microtubules. they then combine with the cell membrane to generate cell-associated viruses, that lead to actin polymerization and the production of filaments, which help to facilitate cev evacuation from the cell. both extracellular and intracellular viral pathogens have a significant impact on pathogenesis. the primary means of disease transmission from one cell to the next are intracellular viral virions, together with cevs. eevs are necessary for viral spread within an affected organism. . signs and symptoms of mpox viral infection mpox is a self-limiting condition that typically disappears in two to four weeks. the three distinct stages of a less severe form of smallpox include incubation, prodrome, and rash, which are either indicators or symptoms of mpv infection. on average, the incubation phase lasts between seven and fourteen days. fever and lymphadenopathy are common during the prodrome phase, with the latter characterizing mpox as opposed to smallpox and chickenpox1. compared to many other illnesses, such as the flu, mpox does not initially present with any noteworthy symptoms. in addition to other symptoms, patients may also have a fever, headache, muscular pains, and enlarged lymph nodes. a rash forms after a few days, first appearing on the face before moving to other parts of the body. the rash develops in a specific manner, beginning as a macular rash and continuing through popular, vesicular, and pustular phases before crusting over and flaking off. the rash often affects the face, trunk, and limbs, but it may also affect other parts of the body, such as the genitalia. mpox symptoms are comparable to smallpox symptoms while being less severe, and most patients recover completely. with a mortality rate between and %, mpox can be risky. how severe the infection is will depend on many factors, including the virus strain, the accessibility of medical care, the level of exposure, and the patient’s condition. mpxv enters the body and replicates, spreading to lymph nodes, causing primary and secondary viremia. the virus primarily affects the skin, causing rash development, oral mucous membranes, genitalia, and conjunctivae. anogenital lesions, pharyngitis, and lymphadenopathy are common symptoms. mpxv can also affect the respiratory system, leading to severe breathing difficulties, pneumonia, and lung inflammation. pulmonary surfactants and lubricants can aid lung function. oral cavity lesions, such as glossitis, stomatitis, and gingivitis, can spread. lymphadenopathy is a distinguishing characteristic of mpx, manifesting as lymph node enlargement during primary and secondary viremia. mpxv causes relatively few liver lesions, but viral antigens can disseminate throughout the liver, leading to hepatocyte degeneration and liver lesions. a recent journal paper reports the clinical presentation of the first recorded case of mpxv, sars-cov-and hiv-co-infection. mpox and covid-are both airborne viruses that cause symptoms such as fever, lymphadenopathy, headache, sore throat, and exhaustion. this case study’s subject was a -year-old man who developed symptoms after visiting spain. the patient tested positive for sars-cov-and had skin lesions similar to mpox. co-infection with mpxv, sars-cov-and hiv- was verified by diagnostic testing. the case illustrates the overlapping symptoms of mpox and covid-emphasizing the significance of collecting a complete history and considering sexual behaviors for a correct diagnosis. sexual contact appears to be a significant mechanism of transmission for mpox, necessitating extensive sti screening. because the patient’s hiv-status indicates recent infection, care should be maintained even after clinical remission. because there is presently no widely approved therapy or prevention for mpox, healthcare systems must be aware of the likelihood of co-infections and advocate adequate diagnostic testing in high-risk people. . sampling and diagnosis of mpox virus the pcr test is crucial for detecting the mpxv in suspected cases. samples should be collected from exposed lesions, vesicles, or ulcers, with pharyngeal swabs taken if throat lesions are present. proper labeling is essential in order to avoid processing errors. healthcare workers must wear personal protective equipment, including droplet, contact, and eye protection, during diagnostic procedures to ensure safety. for high-risk cases without visible lesions, throat swabs may be used, with continued symptom monitoring if results are negative. samples should be transported to local or advanced laboratories for mpxv testing, alongside tests for other infections like hsv or syphilis. follow-up testing for confirmed cases includes lesion and throat swabs, blood samples in edta tubes, and urine samples, all stored in appropriate mediums. these measures provide valuable insights into disease progression and inform decisions on transitioning patients from isolation to inpatient care. accurate diagnostic testing for mpox requires proper sampling and storage techniques. specimens should be placed in sterile, leak-proof containers suitable for shipping under refrigerated or frozen conditions. dry swabs, lesion crusts, and swabs in a viral transport medium can be tested within days if refrigerated, or within –days if frozen, depending on the specimen type. for shipping, specimens must be categorized as biological substances, bagged individually to prevent rejection due to leaks, and transported on dry ice to maintain the required temperature. packaging must ensure structural integrity and allow for gas release from dry ice. only trained personnel should handle hazardous shipments, which must be labeled with all necessary identifiers and contact details. these protocols are critical for safely transporting mpox samples linked to clade ii for laboratory testing. diagnostic results must be correlated with clinical and epidemiological data to confirm mpox infection. following these guidelines ensures specimen integrity and accurate testing. to further confirm mpox virus infection, diagnostic tests, and clinical and epidemiological data must be correlated. the diagnosis of mpox virus infection is based on clinical signs, laboratory tests, and medical history. by checking for lymphadenopathy at the prodromal stage of the illness, it is possible to clinically distinguish mpox from chickenpox or smallpox. the specimen samples are collected and forwarded to the lab to verify the diagnosis in compliance with the who criteria. pcr is the most widely used laboratory diagnostic method to identify mpox due to its accuracy and sensitivity. the fluid that is produced by vesicles and pustules, as well as dry crusts are the best samples to use in the diagnosis of mpox. when a lesion sample needs to be kept cool and kept in a dry, sterile tube without a viral transport medium, a biopsy appears to be an alternative in some circumstances. pcr blood tests are often inconclusive and should not be routinely obtained from patients because viremia typically lasts for a short period compared to the time the material is taken after symptoms start. the recommended specimen type for diagnosing mpox is skin lesion material, including swabs of lesion exudate, roofs from multiple lesions, or lesion crusts. testing should be offered to individuals meeting the suspected case definition, considering both clinical and epidemiological factors. it can be challenging to differentiate mpox based solely on clinical presentation, and other potential causes of skin lesions should be considered. safety procedures, including proper personal protective equipment and handling of specimens, must be followed. the collection and storage of specimens, including skin lesion material and additional types for research purposes, are needed. nucleic acid amplification testing, particularly polymerase chain reaction, is recommended for confirming mpox infection. reagents, controls, waste disposal, and biosafety measures should be appropriately managed during testing. serological testing and genetic sequencing are additional tools for diagnosis and surveillance. overall, the adherence to biosafety measures and risk assessments are crucial in handling specimens and conducting laboratory testing for mpox. for the confirmation of mpxv infection, clinical and epidemiological data should be considered. positive detection using an orthopoxvirus polymerase chain reaction assay, followed by mpxv confirmation via pcr and/or sequencing, or, in suspected cases, positive detection using an mpxv-specific pcr, confirms mpxv infection. although mpxv-specific confirmatory testing is preferred, a positive opxv pcr assay result is sufficient for laboratory confirmation. in instances where the clinical presentation and epidemiology indicate mpxv infection despite negative pcr results, serological testing can be utilized to investigate a prior infection. false-negative results can be influenced by factors such as specimen quality, handling, transportation, and technical issues. genetic sequence data, obtained through sequencing positive mpxv specimens, can provide valuable information on the virus’s origins, epidemiology, and characteristics. the who encourages countries and laboratories to share gsd, including raw data, through public access databases to enhance understanding and collaboration. sequencing can be performed using sanger or next-generation sequencing methods. laboratories must adhere to national reporting regulations. positive or negative test findings should be immediately reported to national authorities. states parties to the ihr are reminded of their responsibility to communicate relevant public health information with the who for occurrences that they have notified the who. access to the quick and reliable laboratory testing of samples from cases under investigation is critical for diagnosing and monitoring this developing virus. all nations should have access to reliable testing, either locally or by referral to laboratories in other countries willing and capable of diagnosing opxv or mpxv. the who’s regional offices can help member states gain access to testing through referral. the inactivation of samples at a local laboratory, where suitable and securely conducted, may improve referral and alleviate logistical issues. countries are invited to exchange their sequencing data so that the present outbreak can be better understood. . mpxv and mechanisms of immune evasion mpxv has sequence similarities with the vaccinia virus and uses a variety of strategies to avoid detection by the immune system. the mpxv f3 protein and the vacv e3 protein are homologous, indicating a possible functional relationship. mpxv suppresses the antiviral immune response more effectively than a vacv mutant missing the n-terminal region of its e3 homolog. this suggests that mpxv may prevent symptoms caused by its e3 homolog’s lack of the n-terminal region. mpxv cannot downregulate mhc class i; instead, it employs a method to prevent cd4+ and cd8+ t-cell activation upon interaction with mpxv-infected cells. by suppressing local t-cell responses, mpxv can evade the immune system while maintaining a viral reservoir. mpxv-encoded immunomodulators play a critical role in blocking antiviral t-cell responses, which are activated by the host. neutralizing antibodies are crucial for the protection against severe mpxv infections, while memory t-cells alone do not provide sufficient protection. the spread of mpxv relies on interactions with circulating monocytes, which may protect the virus from humoral immune responses. macrophages and other immune cells may also aid in the spread of mpxv. understanding the immune evasion mechanisms of mpxv and the interactions between various orthopoxviruses, such as vacv, is important for studying immunity to mpox and developing effective preventive measures like vaccinations. . treatment for mpox fortunately, the clinical course of mpox infections is usually mild and self-limiting. as a result, it infrequently justifies specialized therapy, and, instead, treatment is typically supportive. supportive therapy includes things like analgesics for pain, antipyretics for fever, and antibiotics for subsequent bacterial infections. yet, some people could require a certain kind of treatment. for those with serious illnesses, immunocompromised people, pregnant women, and youngsters, specific therapies can be required. the treatment and immunizations created to combat smallpox have shown some success against the mpox virus because of the similarities between mpox and smallpox. there is, however, little evidence to support this claim. mpox disease is not curable; however, research on treating smallpox indicates that vaccinia vaccinations, tecovirimat, vaccinia immune globulin, and cidofovir might be beneficial. cidofovir is an antiviral drug that inhibits the viral dna polymerase and exerts antiviral activity against a variety of viruses. it is usually administered intravenously with fluid administration and probenecid. although cidofovir has the potential to cause nephrotoxicity, a modified version called cmx-has been developed that is not nephrotoxic. in addition, cmx-exhibits antiviral activity against numerous orthopoxvirus species. st-is an agent that is administered orally and targets the intracellular release of the virus. it has shown promising results against several orthopoxviruses, including the variola virus that causes smallpox. by inhibiting the release of viral particles from infected cells, st-helps to contain the spread of infection. the european medicines agency authorized the usage of tecovirimat for treating measles in reported by the world health organization. it was first created as a smallpox remedy. because tecovirimat is currently not widely available, any usage of it needs to be carefully supervised. by blocking the viral dna polymerase, cidofovir has antiviral efficacy against some viruses. it has been observed that tecovirimat is particularly sensitive to several orthopoxviruses, including variola, cowpox, vaccinia, rabbitpox, ectromelia, and mpox. for the treatment of mpox, tecovirimat, an oral inhibitor of intracellular viral release, may be beneficial. these antiviral agents have been studied in various combinations, such as with vaccinia immunoglobulin, which is used to treat serious adverse events associated with smallpox vaccination clinical trials. the combination of these drugs has the potential to effectively treat orthopoxvirus infections. notwithstanding the recommended course of treatment, supportive and symptomatic therapy is the backbone of treating a mpox virus infection. it is crucial to realize that the only established treatment for mpox is treating symptoms and preventing complications. given the outbreak of mpox in and the current mpox cases worldwide, more research must be carried out before any treatment or vaccine can be created. to prevent infection with the mpox virus, certain precautions can be taken. this includes, but is not limited to, the following: consciously avoiding encounters with animals suspected to be mpox virus carriers, especially in regions where the mpox virus is prevalent; placing ill people in a room with negative pressure to prevent the virus from spreading from one person to another; isolating and euthanizing the animals suspected to be the virus reservoirs; avoiding contact with any objects that have come into contact with ill animals or people; and avoiding contact with ill people. frontline personnel caring for mpox virus-infected patients and other high-risk individuals who are expected to interact with infected individuals should wear the appropriate personal protective equipment designed to protect against airborne infectious agents, such as n-masks, fully covered water-resistant gowns, and double-layered gloves. . vaccination/prevention of mpox research has shown that smallpox vaccination offers a reliable defense against illnesses caused by mpox and other orthopoxviruses. when administered early in the incubation phase, it can postpone the start of the disease or minimize the severity of the illness. however, patients who have impaired immune systems face the risk of suffering serious side effects. mpox has become more prevalent since smallpox was eradicated in as a result of the end of immunization initiatives to prevent viral illnesses. several vaccines are available for preventing mpox, each with distinct mechanisms and efficacy levels, playing a critical role in responding to recent outbreaks, particularly in non-endemic regions in . jynneos is a non-replicating modified vaccinia ankara vaccine developed by bavarian nordic. widely used for preventing smallpox and mpox, especially in high-risk populations, it has demonstrated safety and efficacy in clinical trials. strong immune responses have been observed in healthy adults and individuals with hiv. approved by the fda for adults, jynneos has shown excellent outcomes in preventing severe disease among healthcare workers and close contacts of infected individuals. its safety profile, particularly for immunocompromised individuals, and its availability in countries like the u.s., canada, and the eu make it a cornerstone in mpox prevention. acam2000, produced by emergent biosolutions, is a live, replication-competent smallpox vaccine authorized under the fda’s emergency use authorization for mpox. while highly effective in preventing smallpox, its live-virus composition increases the risks of side effects, including myocarditis and complications in immunocompromised individuals. despite these risks, acam2000 remains a valuable option in outbreak scenarios. lc16m8, developed by km biologics, is a live attenuated smallpox vaccine with who emergency use listing. administered via a bifurcated needle, it is effective as a single-dose vaccine for individuals aged one year and older. widely used in low-resource settings, it provides strong protection against mpox and smallpox with fewer side effects than acam2000. its affordability and ease of administration make it particularly valuable in endemic regions like africa. mrna vaccines, exemplified by moderna’s mrna-represent a promising new platform for mpox prevention. currently in phase i/ii trials, this vaccine is designed to protect against both smallpox and mpox. early results indicate safety and robust immune responses. if successful, mrna-could provide a flexible, efficient approach to combating mpox, leveraging the same mrna technology used effectively in covid-vaccines. these vaccines, with unique characteristics and clinical results, are integral to global mpox control efforts. their availability, coupled with public health interventions such as vaccination campaigns, contact tracing, and health education, is essential to mitigating outbreaks. the advancement of vaccine technologies, particularly mrna platforms, holds significant promise for enhancing our preparedness against mpox and other emerging infectious diseases. by leveraging these tools and strategies, the global health community can better respond to current and future outbreaks, ultimately reducing mpox’s burden worldwide. the attenuated strains used in the next-generation smallpox vaccines, including acam2000, lc16m8, and modified vaccinia ankara, not only have a better safety profile than the first- and second-generation smallpox vaccines, but also successfully stimulate the production of antibodies in atopic and immunocompromised patients. the live smallpox vaccination acam2000 has the benefit of being delivered in a single dosage. this medication is not recommended since it can proliferate in the cells of immunocompromised people. furthermore, pregnant women and anyone with eczema or atopic dermatitis should not be vaccinated. a small number of vaccinated people may experience cardiac problems. increased lesioning at the location of immunization is normal and should be expected. the lc16m8 vaccine is an attenuated smallpox virus vaccine. imvamune, a modified live attenuated vaccine, has fewer adverse effects and a safer profile than acam2000. known as imvamune in the us and imvanex in europe, it has a limited replication ability, making it suitable for all adults, including those with weakened immune systems. even after two doses of the live acam2000 vaccine, no skin lesions appear at the vaccination site. given the global impact of the mpox virus, particularly in the context of the covid-era, it is imperative that national and international research efforts be intensified. these efforts should focus on identifying virulence markers of the disease, understanding the factors that influence mpv evolution, which include both host and viral factors, investigating human behaviors that contribute to zoonotic spillover events, finding surrogates for asymptomatic infections, and examining the determinants of immunity for both the virus and the host. the goal of this research is to prevent mpv from filling the ecological gap left by the eradication of the variola major virus and potentially evolving into a more dangerous pathogen. to achieve this, the preventive epidemiological surveillance of mpv in endemic and high-risk areas, particularly in nigeria, is essential. this surveillance should be conducted routinely and not only in response to outbreaks. support the inclusion of routine and regular epidemiological surveillance of mpv in humans and animals in existing surveillance systems, such as the surveillance outbreak response management and analysis system. this would allow the early detection and effective management of mpox epidemics. the sewer coronavirus alert network was established in to test wastewater samples for the presence of the covid-virus. since june it has expanded to include mpxv detection in water plants. combining this network with a phylogenomic analysis could provide insights into mpxv’s spread and evolution. although criticized for being reactive, scan has proven effective in anticipating the virus spread, enabling frontline workers to control outbreaks and prevent a potential new mpox pandemic. . recent advances in mpox clinical trials the jynneos vaccine, approved for smallpox and mpox prevention, has been central to clinical efforts. recent trials have explored alternative dosing strategies, such as intradermal administration, to expand the vaccine supply. this method uses one-fifth of the standard subcutaneous dose, enabling healthcare providers to vaccinate more people without compromising immunogenicity. initial findings indicate comparable immune responses and safety profiles, making this approach vital in public health emergencies. other vaccine candidates, like acam2000 and lc16m8, have also undergone evaluations. acam2000, a replication-competent smallpox vaccine, has been authorized under emergency use for mpox. despite its efficacy, its side effects, such as myocarditis risks, limit widespread use. lc16m8, a live attenuated vaccine, has emerged as a safer alternative, especially for immunocompromised individuals. studies confirm its effectiveness as a single-dose vaccine, particularly in endemic regions. additionally, efforts to innovate mpox vaccines using mrna technology are underway. moderna is conducting early-phase trials for its mrna-vaccine, aiming to offer a flexible platform similar to covid-vaccines. these trials seek to establish safety and robust immune responses, with large-scale studies planned in the future. complementing these efforts, the national institutes of health and the centers for disease control and prevention are conducting serological studies to track mpox transmission and evaluate vaccine effectiveness. these initiatives help refine outbreak responses and improve future preparedness. in terms of therapeutics, the antiviral drug tecovirimat has been a focus of several studies. this drug, initially approved for smallpox, has shown promise in treating mpox. randomized controlled trials in the u.s. and the democratic republic of congo are assessing its safety and efficacy for mpox treatment. the trials include diverse populations, including immunocompromised individuals and pregnant women, to gather comprehensive safety data. however, recent studies revealed that studies on tecovirimat in the democratic republic of the congo and by the nih found the antiviral safe but ineffective in improving mpox symptom resolution or pain reduction, including for clade i cases. these findings highlight the need for further research to optimize mpox treatments. . conclusions and future directions for mpox research and control measures indeed, the mpox virus has long been a neglected zoonotic disease with the potential to spread and/or be used as a bioweapon. there are now no traditional guidelines for clinical care, medications, or vaccinations, although the condition was originally diagnosed in and first recorded in a human in . the limited research on the human immune response to mpxv infection remains unanswered. understanding immune defenses and the potential for mucosal protection resulting from smallpox immunization or mpxv infection is essential. investigating tissue-resident memory t cells and iga in mpxv-related respiratory complications is essential. factors like behavior, geography, diet, medical history, immunological factors, and genetics may also impact mpxv susceptibility and immunity. the virus can spread globally and has the potential to expand beyond africa. effective management strategies, such as ring-vaccination and pre-exposure vaccination, are needed to combat the outbreak. increased surveillance efforts, vaccination availability, and antiviral medications can help mitigate the threat of mpxv. moreover, it is a clear call to action for public health authorities to assume responsibility for informing specialists in the field of their results and being open and truthful with the general public. recent outbreaks around the globe have highlighted the significance of rigorous and ongoing surveillance, as well as the creation of novel preventative and therapeutic strategies. to stop rising transmission rates or virulence, appropriate and effective medicines as well as active monitoring activities are urgently needed. at least in endemic regions and possibly globally, the mpox virus is the predominant orthopoxvirus in humans. it takes a lot of effort to prevent mpox, which is no longer a rare condition. the human mpox virus should be monitored and controlled using the insights learnt from the covid-pandemic.
mpox virus as a global public health emergency: a scoping review abstract the monkeypox virus has emerged as a global public health emergency of international concern recently. the virus that was endemic in west and central africa has now been reported with chains of global transmission to several countries. a scoping review was carried out from the relevant literature available from pubmed, scopus and web of science. this comprehensive analysis describes the virus epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, complications including secondary bacterial infections, diagnosis, treatment and vaccination. the article underscores the significance of key viral and immune mediators of infection and discusses updated recommendations on therapeutic strategies and vaccination. . introduction monkeypox virus is a double-stranded dna virus belonging to the genus orthopoxvirus of the family poxviridae and causes zoonotic infections. mpox was declared a global public health emergency of international concern by the world health organization, geneva, in august . the virus appears to have been primarily confined to the tropical rainforest regions of central and western africa. having remained largely unrecognized until the first description of the infection originated from monkeys of the brazilian forest showing lesions akin to smallpox pustules followed by several reports during –. the virus was placed within the group of poxviruses in . the first confirmed global outbreak of mpox was reported in denmark in among cynomolgus monkeys imported from singapore followed by outbreaks documented in the netherlands, the united states, the philippines, malaysia and certain other countries. nevertheless, as the infections were largely confined among primates, the absence of human infections during these outbreaks misled the transmissibility of the virus, and humans were considered nonsusceptible. the mpox virus was antigenically related to other poxviruses including smallpox, cowpox, camelpox, buffalopox and rabbitpox viruses as reported in the 1960s, based on morphology, nature of inclusion bodies, clinical manifestations and serological reactions. the pathogenesis largely resembled smallpox and cowpox except the cutaneous haemorrhagic lesions that are produced in rabbits. subsequently, human mpox virus infection was reported in six individuals between late and early across three different west african regions. at least four of these were confirmed with culture, hemagglutination and neutralizing titres with the poxvirus group. this confirmed the susceptibility of humans to mpox and that vaccination against smallpox gave protection against mpox. during the same time, at least five species of rodents were found to be susceptible to mpox virus, of which rabbits and white mice were highly susceptible, as the mpox-specific antibodies were detectable in these species for over a year. when the smallpox eradication programme ended in africa, sporadic outbreaks of mpox infection were documented from the tropical rainforest regions of central and west africa. the animal reservoir of these infections remains essentially undiscovered, and most of the patients with documented mpox had been in close contact with unvaccinated individuals. a specific large outbreak in different regions of zaire during –among all age groups led to the revival of surveillance programs on zoonotic diseases and presumed human-to-human transmission. this outbreak also confirmed that mpox infection occurred largely among unvaccinated contacts. the virus emergence and re-emergence in zaire served as a model to study the disease pattern, incidence and attack rates, disease surveillance and establishment of laboratory diagnosis modalities such as elisa for the detection of neutralizing antibodies. the genomic compositions for smallpox, cowpox and mpox were first reported in and revealed considerable similarity in genomic regions that determine the host range. the evolution of pcr assays helped in differentiating further as distinct sequences among the poxviruses. in mpox was declared a potential biowarfare agent, and the mpox infection was considered an emerging zoonotic disease with public health importance, and several antiviral drugs were reviewed for likely repurposing and patient management. the infection was considered endemic in the rodent population in parts of west africa. in imported rodents, exotic pets and prairie dogs that were used in hunting caused an outbreak in different regions of the united states. the imported rodents included african rope squirrels, tree squirrels, african giant pouched rats, brush-tailed porcupines, dormice and striped mice. the smallpox vaccine helped prevent the spread of orthopox viruses and even outweighed the neurological complications the vaccine can give rise to as a side effect. considering the surge in human-to-human transmission rates, especially among close contacts and healthcare workers, following the global lack of smallpox vaccination, the mpox virus was placed on the red alert list, leading to a revival of antiviral therapies and vaccination programs. the first immunological evidence of protection against the mpox virus by the smallpox vaccine focussed only on cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies but not cell-mediated immune responses. later, the cd8+ t-cells were reported to complement the antibody-mediated viral killing necessary for developing resistance against the infection. the mpox virus was distinguished as two distinct clades: clades i and ii. the virus types that are identified in central africa, especially in the democratic republic of congo, were categorized as clade i, which primarily afflicted children and adolescents. the virus types that caused an outbreak in in the united states were categorized as clade iia and those that caused the –mpox outbreak in nigeria and the global outbreak were labelled as clade iib. during this global outbreak, the clade iib mpox caused ∼confirmed cases and approximately deaths in more than countries. . epidemiology .. prevalence data-global trends the mpox virus has become the most common and aggressive orthopoxvirus in the human population after the smallpox virus that was successfully eradicated in . in the backdrop of waning immunity to the smallpox virus attributed to the global stop of vaccination, there is a universally acceptable consensus on the resurgence of related viruses. in sporadic cases of mpox from different countries outside of africa were reported including the united kingdom, the united states, singapore and israel. most of them had a travel history to endemic areas or contact with individuals diagnosed with mpox. the mpox virus strains were identified as variant clade i, which is considered to have a low fatality rate. soon, countries including portugal followed by canada, spain and other european countries such as belgium, sweden, germany, france, canary islands, the netherlands and italy reported a surge in mpox cases. the who declared by mid-a ‘pheic' considering the large outbreaks in several countries. by the end of the outbreak amplified exponentially to as high as laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths that spread to asian countries including hong kong, china, the philippines and taiwan. currently, an alarming escalation in the global incidence of mpox infections is being reported. between january and july the total reported mpox cases from member states across all six who regions are laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths as per the who recent report. it is interesting to note that the majority of mpox-infected and mpox-related deaths documented were from regions that had no historical reports. the mpox impact in the west and central africa corresponded to historical reports. this indicates that the reported sporadic cases during this outbreak are mostly linked to travel history and animals imported from the endemic regions. the most affected countries globally since january include the united states, brazil, spain, democratic republic of congo, france, colombia, mexico, the united kingdom, peru and germany. all these countries account for % of the cases reported, globally as per the who. among the confirmed cases, african americans were highly affected followed by hispanics or latinos, whites and asians. the global trend also indicated that men aged to years are affected to a higher extent compared to other gender and age groups. the endemic mpox infection peaks generally during the months of may and june and is the lowest from august to october. in the usa, as of mid-january cases and deaths have been reported due to mpox clade ii subtype. california reported the highest number of cases followed by new york, texas, florida and georgia. a vast majority of the populations in these locations were either unvaccinated or had received only one dose of the smallpox vaccine. in the united states, the outbreak of clade i mpox viruses ended with ∼confirmed cases. the outbreak was caused by the clade ii virus, which is responsible for the ongoing worldwide outbreak since july . the first mpox case in the who southeast asian region was reported from india in july and this was an individual who had a travel history to the middle east. in a period of two to three months, at least mpox cases were reported thereafter from across different parts of southeast asia, predominantly from india followed by thailand and indonesia. in july three major states of the democratic republic of congo—burundi, rwanda and uganda—reported confirmed cases with clade i mpox viruses. although the viruses are endemic in these regions, the outbreak was more widespread across neighbouring countries and has led to stringent public health measures for prevention and response. clade i is reported to be associated with a higher rate of severe disease as compared to clade ii. the outbreaks that were reported from different countries from to are listed in table and the recent outbreaks in are shown in figure . .. zoonotic transmission primarily being a zoonotic disease, the natural animal reservoirs of the mpox virus largely remain enigmatic. the initial detection of mpox in diseased monkeys was followed by rope and sun squirrels and other wild rodents. the infected animal likely shows symptoms such as fever, rashes, lethargy, loss of appetite, coughing, bloating, nasal/eye secretions and skin blisters. although many mammals could be susceptible to mpox, there are very limited data available on the complete viral host range. the susceptibility among the species or varieties or strains that can affect each animal species largely remains ambiguous. a retrospective observational study on animal reservoirs indicated four animal species including the african striped squirrel, african dormouse and gambian pouched rat acting as major animal reservoirs for mpox. humans acquire mpox infection from animals through direct contact with the body fluids, ingestion of infected or contaminated meat, animal bites and scratches. the virus is transmitted from infected humans through direct skin or lesion contact, respiratory droplets or large water droplets during prolonged face-to-face and sexual contact. furthermore, transmission can also occur via fomites contaminated with infectious material derived from infected lesions. vertical transmission from the infected mother is not clear, but adverse foetal outcome was reported in an infected mother. a recent meta-analysis indicated a high prevalence of mpox dna in seminal fluids, indicating the potential role of sexual transmission. the rate of pcr positivity was higher in skin samples followed by anogenital/rectal samples, but lower in nasopharyngeal, urine and blood/plasma samples. during the outbreak, % of the infected individuals tested positive for mpox virus in their seminal fluids. however, horizontal transmission through genital secretions during sexual activity remains unclear despite the evidence of infections acquired following sexual contact. there is also considerable evidence that mpox infection inflicts a considerable degree of tissue damage in the rectal compartment, leading to severe proctitis. the use of experimental animal models represents a key strategy for studying the transmission dynamics and pathophysiology of mpox virus infection in animals. despite the serological and molecular evidence of virus infection in certain animals is it important to use correct models. the prairie dog model resulted in similar pathological changes characterized by skin lesions and lymphoid tissue necrosis as seen in humans. viral shedding was higher in the nasal secretions of the infected animals followed by spleen and cutaneous lesions. the lymphatic spread followed by hematogenous spread occurred resulting in secondary viremia. the squirrel model showed similar results in the viral shedding being the highest in the oral secretions but did not reveal the involvement of the liver or spleen. the gambian pouched rat model indicated the highest viral shedding in oral secretions and indicated clinical signs of the disease. .. travel-associated mpox outbreaks the democratic republic of congo recorded a high outbreak in with clade i mpox followed by the other outbreak in april with the same clade. international travel and social gatherings play an important role in mpox transmission and so the neighbouring countries of the democratic republic of congo are at a high risk of mpox infection outbreaks. hitherto, the countries bordering the eastern parts of the democratic republic of congo including burundi, rwanda and uganda have reported several cases of outbreaks due to clade i mpox suggesting transmission to neighbouring countries. mpox vaccination has been recommended for people at risk, which includes the unvaccinated population, pregnant women, neonates, individuals with other skin infections and immunocompromised individuals. owing to the travel restrictions including commercial vehicles from and to the democratic republic of congo, the risk of spread is limited. nevertheless, infection prevention and control as per the centre for disease control and prevention guidelines are provided to reduce the risk of transmission and management of travel-associated mpox. travel to an afflicted country along with the onset of illness within days of travel is considered an important epidemiologic criterion for probable disease confirmation. vaccination recommendations, enhanced surveillance and public health measures play a key role in the mitigation of emerging mpox. travel to the countries that reported mpox cases requires vaccination with a commercial jynneos or acam2000 vaccine completed, with two doses at least days apart. the second dose can be administered sooner if the individual is at risk. however, the spread of mpox cases with no evident travel links to any endemic areas, contact tracing and measures of infection severity are key epidemiological metrics, and even if challenging, it is essential to establish the public health policy. .. genomic variants the viral genome is a double-stranded dna of about base pairs in length coding for > genes. the central part of the genome of about kb is flanked by variable regions and inverted terminal repeats. the central region possesses conserved sequences coding for essential functions including transcription, replication, structural proteins and enzymes. the virus shows antigenic similarities with other orthopox viruses, which provide cross-protection. microevolution is believed to have emerged as a cause of hypermutations induced by apolipoprotein b mrna–editing catalytic polypeptide-like the enzyme that mediates cytidine deamination to uracil and also plays a vital role in antiviral immunity. the mutations in the specific viral dna motifs could have implications for the evolutionary potential of mpox during the outbreak. the difference in the virulence and transmission between the two mpox clades are studied as it is vital for developing appropriate therapeutic strategies. the clade i mpox closely aligned with smallpox virus infections. clade i was reported as the causative agent of a more severe form of the disease, mostly affecting the smallpox-unvaccinated group. clades i and iia were mostly endemic, but the clade iib infections occurred across the countries including the nonendemic regions with varied clinical presentation. clade ii is connected to the transmission among sexual contacts especially among high-risk individuals such as men who have sex with men and people living with hiv. clade ii mpox viruses also have a high human-to-human transmission without any apparent zoonotic link. clade i mpox cases were primarily among children and young men and had a high zoonotic transmission link. the genetic characteristics of clade iib that separate it from clade i and clade iia should be considered for further investigation on unique mpox transmission potential. mpox clade i showed increased virulence with -logs higher lethal dose than clade ii in animal models. significant differences in virulence were also observed among the mpox clades with different routes of infection. the gene variations between clades i and ii that contribute to the severity of the transmission potential of the virus are not clearly understood, but it is believed that variable genes such as opg195, b14r and opg032 determine functions including host range, virulence and immunomodulation. furthermore, the identical but inverted repeats of .kb sequences flanking at each end of the mpox genome play a major role in immune evasion and host range. insertion and expansion of inverted dna repeats in the mpox virus were reported to be a major factor in an outbreak in germany. case-fatality ratio associated with clade i is about %, while clade ii has a cfr of around %. compared to clade i, the genes d14l, d15l, d16l and d17l are lost and the genes d4l, b14l and b15l are curtailed in clade ii. in addition, genes n3r, n2r, n1r and r1r that are present in clade iia are absent in clades i and iib. the role of these genetic changes in the pathogenesis mechanism is so far unknown. . immunopathogenesis .. pathophysiology the virus enters the host through various routes such as the mucosa overlying the oropharynx, nasopharynx, ocular, rectal and genitourinary tracts, and the skin. although the virus primarily affects the lymphoid tissue, it has a broad cell tropism and therefore can afflict multiple organs. the specific host cell receptors that mediate virus entry are not clearly defined, but virulence factors such as the mpox inhibitor of complement enzymes, a -kda secretory protein and its homologue, complement control protein are reported to modulate the host range and tissue tropism. mopice is expressed by the highly virulent strains of clade i, while clade ii lacks this protein. this protein is also found to modulate adaptive immune responses in the host. similar proteins that appear in variola and vaccinia viruses are called smallpox inhibitors of complement enzymes and vaccinia complement control protein, respectively. these proteins regulate the human complement system, and their dimeric forms act as major virulence factors. these proteins show significant differences in their efficiency among the poxviruses. this could be a major factor determining the host range, infectivity and transmission potential of different poxviruses. these complement regulators and other virulence factors such as il-binding protein, b10r, b14r, b19r, d10l and d14l could play a vital role in the pathogenesis and tissue tropism. further studies on the differences in the structural and functional motifs of these proteins could help with our understanding of the broad tissue and host tropisms of mpox viruses. the virus possibly uses multiple ligands to interact with the cell surface receptors, which may also explain the broad animal and human host cell tropism and the challenges in the identification of specific receptors used by the virus to infect. multiple receptors including heparan sulphate, glycosaminoglycans and chondroitin have been reported to mediate virus entry. the viral genome expresses membrane proteins that are species-specific and contribute to the pathogenesis based on their presence or modifications in these proteins. the membrane proteins vary in composition within the two distinct infectious poxvirus particles viz. extracellular enveloped virions and intracellular enveloped virions. after gaining cellular entry, early, intermediate and late viral mrna synthesis occurs followed by protein synthesis. the infectious virions are assembled and become an iev as it is encased within a bilayer membrane generated from the golgi complex including golgi-associated retrograde protein and conserved oligomeric golgi complex. these also play a vital role in virus–host interaction and are part of the formation of eevs for a successful egress process. .. immune response and host interactions the virus entry into a susceptible host cell is mediated by cog complex proteins. these proteins assist viral fusion and mediate the virus entry and early gene expression. the viral-induced host immune response may play a significant role in the disease pathogenesis. the disseminated mpox infection activates a strong immune response involving multiple organs including lymphoid organs. the viruses also possess unique immune evasion strategies, leading to an increase in prevalence rates among vulnerable animal and human populations, and one of these strategies is the viral evasion of tlr3 signalling and through the downregulation of cytokines and chemokines such as tnf-α, il-1α and ccl5. the innate immune responses act as the first line of defence and include cells such as monocytes and natural killer cells and innate factors such as type i interferons and inflammatory cytokines. adaptive immunity plays a substantial role in virus clearance and long-term protection. the efficacy of the nk cells is hampered by downregulating the chemokine receptors such as ccr2, ccr5, ccr7, cxcr3 and cx3cr1 required for nk cell migration. the most notable innate mechanism activated is the cgas-sting/mita pathway. the pathway mediates immune responses against many dna viruses, bacteria, parasites, autoimmune diseases and cancers. this pathway has emerged as a crucial element of innate antiviral immunity. the viral f17 protein interferes with the cgas-sting/mita signalling pathway and sequesters the regulators of mammalian targets of rapamycin complexes mtorc1 and mtorc2 and through other nuclease enzymes termed as ‘poxins' that cleave ′′-cgamp to control cgas-sting/mita signalling. many other viral genes including vaccinia virus protein and e3 protein inhibit ifn-signalling pathways, and f14 protein disrupts nf-κb activation. regarding viral effects on the activation of the adaptive response, the m2 protein and a35 protein disrupt antigen presentation, t-cell priming, and chemokine synthesis and function together in modulating the host immune responses. . clinical manifestations .. pathological features following an incubation period of .days, the virus replicates in the local inoculation site and spreads to local lymph nodes. the symptom onset resembles smallpox infection with early symptoms of painful lesions with fever and other prodromal syndromes that last for –days including chills and lymphadenopathy. moreover, the symptom of myalgia occurs either before or after the appearance of lesions. lymphadenopathy is considered an important clinical manifestation and the pathognomonic sign of mpox that could help distinguish it from other orthopoxvirus infections and other skin diseases. rashes appear within days of fever, and the common skin sites include the face, chest, arms, legs, genitals, anorectals, palms, soles, mouth and eyes. the rash is predominantly monomorphic in a centrifugal distribution and develops into vesicular and pustular lesions that last for –days; thereafter, they become crusts and peel off within a –-day period. based on the skin lesions, the severity score can be classified as mild, moderate, severe and very severe. hospitalization is not required in most cases, the treatment largely includes attentive monitoring, antiviral therapy and management of secondary infections and associated complications. .. other manifestations mpox is foremost a self-limiting disease but can give extended clinical manifestations involving multisystems, which are associated with fatal outcomes, especially among the high-risk groups. immunocompromised individuals, individuals with pre-existing skin eczema, and children and hiv infection are considered risk groups for developing life-threatening mpox. mpox can, apart from giving vesiculopustular lesions on the skin and oral mucosa, cause oral, ocular and neurological manifestations, acute renal injury, fulminant myocarditis leading to pericardial effusion, and pericarditis and lymphadenitis in the cervical, submandibular and inguinal regions. oral manifestations primarily are based on sexual behaviour and mainly present sore throat, ulcers, vesicles and dysphagia. signs and symptoms in the pharynx or oropharynx, especially the tonsils, tongue and perioral site, are predominantly reported followed by lips and palate. the key clinical features resemble other viral and bacterial infections such as herpes viruses, coxsackie viruses and streptococcus pneumoniae, presenting oral lesions with sore throat and should be considered for differential diagnosis. it is noteworthy that the appearance of oral lesions following sexual contact should be considered highly suspicious as they were increasingly observed among individuals who had oral sex with mpox-infected individuals. anogenital lesions and skin rashes with lymphadenopathy were predominantly seen among the infected during the outbreak. other sexually transmitted infections such as syphilis and gonorrhoea should be considered for differential diagnosis as these pathogens cause pharyngeal infections as well as maculopapular lesions in the genitals along with fever and lymphadenopathy. the neurological symptoms range from mild headache and myalgia to encephalitis. more severe cases presented decreased general responsiveness, rigidity and bilateral babinski signs, which are common neurological presentations associated with many neurodegenerative diseases and pathogens infecting the central nervous system. apart from these, mpox-associated ocular infections can lead to keratitis and conjunctivitis, and this can lead to decreased vision. .. secondary bacterial infections several bacterial pathogens mimic mpox infection due to their clinical manifestations and could result in underreporting or misdiagnosis, which could further increase morbidity and mortality or predispose to outbreaks. secondary bacterial infections occur with mpox with a prevalence of %–% and are further complicated by increasing the severity of mpox infection. notably, pharyngeal coinfections with group a streptococci have been frequently reported during the outbreak. the infected patients exhibited posterior oropharyngeal erythema, uvula oedema and vesicular lesion on the epiglottis. these patients respond to antibiotics but require lengthy hospitalization with serious complications. it is therefore important for clinicians to monitor for oropharyngeal manifestations especially when corticosteroids are administered. moreover, streptococcus infection in hiv-infected has been reported with multimucosal involvement and systemic infection, indicating its importance among patients with comorbidities. patients with secondary bacterial sepsis during mpox infection succumb to polymicrobial infection, septic shock with multiorgan involvement, and death. the secondary bacterial infections could be mild and localized but can become complicated if early identification and clinical management are not done with appropriate antibiotics. mpox-associated genital lesions are commonly seen in patients infected with sexually transmitted infections. these infections lead to further complications such as rectitis and proctitis in men and infertility in women. msm usually presents lesions in the anogenital areas and frequently reports coinfections with neisseria gonorrhoeae and chlamydia trachomatis and treponema pallidum. coinfection with such sexually transmitted pathogens results in delayed clearance of mpox, leading to prolonged viral shedding and decelerating therapeutic drug response. .. at-risk populations people living in the endemic regions of africa, or neighbouring areas, and individuals having close contact with the affected communities have a high risk of acquiring the disease. close physical contact including sexual and nonsexual interactions is of serious concern, especially in the adult population. the lack of or incomplete smallpox vaccination is a major factor associated with mpox. prior immunization for smallpox is reported to protect from mpox with up to .% efficacy and decreases the risk .-fold. according to the european cdc, the overall risk of the disease is low; however, among high-risk groups such as those underlying immunocompromised conditions due to hiv infection, pregnant women and newborns are reported with moderate or high risk. the other risk factors include handling, hunting and consuming rodents, contact with wildlife, shared drinking, sleeping and eating and coinfection with large skin lesions, patients lacking sufficient data and patients with chronic skin conditions such as atopic dermatitis and acute skin conditions such as burns. . transmission dynamics .. simulation model and parameter estimation estimation of transmission potential from the high-risk group, men having sex with men to non-msm was analysed using a multigroup dynamic model. the possibility of contact mpox infection from an individual with a high-risk sexual behaviour was less than −the cumulative incidence rate was about × −the required vaccine coverage was %, and the simulated r0 was .. a recent study analysed transmission dynamics through mathematical modelling among different high-risk sexual behaviour groups including msm, gay and bisexual individuals. the study indicated an incubation period of .days and r0 ranging from .to .. the study also showed msm to be the group with the highest risk and emphasized the efficacy of vaccination in reducing the rate of infection. sexual transmission is reported to be the major route of spread compared to nonsexual contact transmission such as through respiratory particles and contaminated surfaces. during the outbreak, among different modes of transmission, male-to-male sexual contact had been the most significant mode that appears to have increased the risk of disease acquisition. this could be possibly due to certain sociobehavioural correlates in the population. another study identified the superspreader gatherings and sexual networks particularly among msms as a major risk factors for the spread of mpox. the time-discrete susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered model estimated r0 of .to .when different factors including travel history, exposure settings and transmission routes were analysed. a systematic review of mathematical models on mpox transmission indicates several parameters including human-to-human contact/transmission rate, progression rate, recovery rate and death rate. the study reported an r0 of .and an effective reproduction number re of .. mpox cases are considerably higher among msms due to their specific sexual patterns. this includes having sexual contact with multiple partners, engaging in interconnected sexual networks and sexual events such as chemsex parties and social stigma associated with msm significantly. these markedly increase the risk of mpox disease transmission. massive super spreading events are linked to crowding within confined spaces, repeated or new sexual contact and coinfections such as hiv. another study showed the potential increase in mpox spread in the population associated with hiv endemicity. mpox spread has been reported to increase in the presence of hiv and is therefore applicable to msm population. among msms, the presence of primary lesions in the external genitalia and anus and subsequent contact with the lesions during the sexual practices further facilitate the disease transmission within the msm population. a bayesian susceptible-infected-recovered model was used to estimate the transmission dynamics, which showed an r0 of .to .with an infectious period of .days. the ratio of r0 and effective reproductive number ranged from to .and indicated the required vaccine coverage of %. the re value indicates the average number of secondary cases per infectious case in both susceptible and protected populations, while r0 indicates the number of persons infected by infectious persons in the susceptible population. the values of both r0 and re help in predicting a pandemic outbreak using contact-tracing data and mathematical models. hence, these different mathematical models indicate varied r0 and re values that make prediction more unreliable and clearly demonstrate that it is important to include several epidemiological factors to calculate an accurate prediction of transmission dynamics. . outbreak management mpox represents a significant public health concern and warrants a robust public health initiative on emergency response management targeting enhanced preparedness, rapid diagnosis, strengthened epidemiological surveys, effective interventions and vaccination. the korean disease control and prevention agency had recommended pre-exposure prophylaxis for high-risk groups. the standard care during the mpox outbreak situation could begin with individual testing and assessment to determine the risk group/s and the requirement of hospitalization, if not home isolation will be adequate. these cases shall undergo testing by pcr. patients presenting severe illness or posing a risk to others should be immediately notified to public health for appropriate infection control. the pcr-negative patients shall be advised to undergo rest and isolation if the symptoms are evident and look for other differential diagnoses. the who guidelines on the management of mpox patients among high-risk groups recommend management with optimized supportive care interventions. recommendations on the prevention and control measures are provided by the cdc for patients in a healthcare setting. this includes additional precautions to prevent transmission with appropriate infection control practices in place, patients placed in individual rooms, use of personal protective equipment and waste management. environmental infection control in healthcare facilities including soiled linens, clothing and bedding are handled following the specific guidelines of the cdc with special care as they are implicated in disease transmission. among the healthcare workers, infection prevention measures should be implemented including hand hygiene, training on standard procedures on the use of ppe and provision of special care for pregnant and immunosuppressed individuals. alongside standard infection control practices, patient isolation or self-isolation, use of ppe, personal hygiene, waste management and other environmental infection control protocols are advocated. the use of epa-registered hospital-grade disinfectant with potential antiviral property, appropriate handling of soiled linens/surfaces and avoidance of activities such as sharing clothing, dry-dusting and sweeping have been recommended in the guidelines. postexposure assessment of risk including -day monitoring period shall be followed in accordance with the recommended guidelines. the current outbreak indicates a deficiency in sufficient and quick response to infections with the potential to cause outbreaks. the clinical outcomes for individuals in high-risk groups are of serious concern. asian and oceania countries with extremely concentrated and connected sexual contact networks are more vulnerable to transmission and require urgent management strategies to prevent outbreaks among them. necessary screening and evaluation for sexually transmitted infections including hiv testing along with health education and improved accessibility should be a priority for substantial improvement in prevention and treatment. . diagnosis and treatment .. diagnostic assays immediate testing for mpox should be conducted on any suspected case. the result should be interpreted after careful consideration of associated clinical and epidemiological factors for assessing the likelihood of infection. due to the atypical presentation of skin rashes, a diagnosis could be challenging, and hence, it is important to consider potential causes of skin rashes and differential diagnosis. the appropriate clinical specimen for diagnostic confirmation includes skin lesion material such as swabs of lesion exudate, roofs of multiple lesions or lesion crust from the suspected cases. the collected swabs should be placed in a viral transport medium, and preferably, samples from lesions, crusts and vesicular fluids should be collected in separate tubes. depending on the clinical presentation and availability of sufficient viral genomic material from the lesion, additional specimens including urine, semen, genital and rectal swabs and blood samples could be considered especially during acute viremia. it is recommended to collect the sample preferably during the prodromal phase and lesions during the macular stage by trained personnel. in the case of neurological involvement, pcr on csf specimens should be considered. pcr is the recommended confirmatory test for either generic identification of orthopox viruses or specific mpox viruses. viral culture is not recommended for a routine diagnostic procedure. additional sequencing techniques might provide additional information on virus clade useful for epidemiological purposes. .. antiviral drugs there is no approved treatment for mpox infections available, but tecovirimat or tpoxx, a potent antiviral drug approved by the fda for the treatment of smallpox was used successfully during the outbreak. the efficacy of tecovirimat has been shown specifically beneficial, especially among high-risk groups, but this drug is not recommended for a mild infection. a reduction in the duration of mpox lesions in children and adults was not achieved by the drug for mpox infections caused by clade i viruses; nevertheless, it significantly reduced the mortality rate from .% to .%. the drug did not show any adverse effects, was tolerated well, and improved the clinical outcome at different scales of clinical severity. to note, tecovirimat is still at the experimental stage being tested for its safety and efficacy for mpox. the study of tecovirimat for mpox is ongoing, and the result from this clinical trial is expected to be available soon. additional strategies such as a combination of tecovirimat with other antiviral or antibiotics should be considered to treat specific or clinical manifestations such as systemic infections, and ocular and oral infections. brincidofovir, a prodrug of cidofovir is being used to treat severe cases of smallpox disease and has shown to be effective against mpox viruses as well. the drug is recommended for adults and neonates who do not respond well to tecovirimat, are severely immunodeficient, or report severe disease or a high risk of progression to severe disease. vaccinia immune globulin intravenous is a licenced treatment for vaccinia-vaccine-induced complications. this therapy can be considered as prophylaxis for severely immunocompromised individuals or can be used in addition to tecovirimat or brincidofovir treatment of mpox. .. vaccine research advocacy for vaccination against the orthopox viruses dates back to when edward jenner demonstrated immunogenicity and cross-protection by cowpox virus against smallpox virus. dryvax was the first-generation smallpox vaccine, which was used globally and withdrawn in . the acam2000, a second-generation live vaccine, is in use for certain at-risk populations. the jynneos vaccine based on the modified vaccinia ankara-bavarian nordic is a live attenuated, third-generation, smallpox vaccine developed by bavarian nordic, denmark. a single dose of mva-bn is recommended for adults and is shown to be highly effective among high-risk sexual contact populations. apart from adults, the vaccine is highly effective in inducing humoral and cell-mediated immune responses in children as well. a systematic review and meta-analysis on the efficacy and safety of mva-bn indicate % efficacy with a single dose and up to % efficacy with a two-dose vaccine. a single vaccination also showed high efficacy in protection as pre-exposure prophylaxis in hiv of a high-risk spanish cohort population. the jynneos is administered subcutaneously in a two-dose series month apart or as a two-dose series as intradermal routes of administration. . conclusions during the global health emergency, it is of utmost importance to focus on pandemic preparedness, efficient management of epidemics and strengthening international ties for combined efforts in diagnosis, treatment and prevention. to implement the appropriate and effective countermeasures against emerging viruses, there is a need to enhance the laboratory testing facilities with wider testing platforms towards early detection. considering the growing number of afflicted populations, joint international action for coordinated measures through evidence-based national and international policy guidelines. several challenges remain in implementing public health policies, especially in resource-limited settings and regions with socioethnic issues. reinforced surveillance measures, multisector partnerships, prophylactic measures, capacity strengthening, tackling social stigma, guaranteeing fair access to vaccines and healthcare services are a few strategies that can help overcome these obstacles. isolation, active monitoring of high-risk individuals and effective vaccination strategies are the key public health measures to be implemented. future research focussing on the long-term clinical impact of mpox, outbreak preparedness, enhanced diagnostics and effective vaccines is imperative. the use of the two vaccines recommended by the who advisory group of experts on immunization and national regulatory bodies shall be accelerated for all countries, especially for lower-income countries. a such harmonized battle along with public health professionals, similar to the handling of covid-pandemic, could help mitigate mpox infection successfully.
mpox: global epidemic situation and countermeasures abstract mpox, is a zoonotic disease caused by the monkeypox virus and is primarily endemic to africa. as countries gradually stop smallpox vaccination, resistance to the smallpox virus is declining, increasing the risk of infection with mpox and other viruses. on august the world health organization announced that the spread of mpox constituted a public health emergency of international concern. mpox’s transmission routes and symptoms are complex and pose new challenges to global health. several vaccines and antiviral drugs have been developed and marketed to prevent and control this disease. this review aims to introduce the epidemic situation, epidemiological characteristics, physiological and pathological characteristics, and preventive measures for mpox in detail, to provide a scientific basis for the prevention and control of mpox viruses worldwide. introduction in an unknown disease characterized by small pox-like blisters on the skin spread in a group of monkeys in africa. danish virologists isolated this new virus during their research and named it monkeypox virus. mpxv belongs to the genus orthopoxvirus in the family poxviridae and can cause zoonotic disease. because mpxv is resistant to low temperatures and dryness and can survive for several months in soil, scabs, and clothing, researchers have speculated that the primary hosts of mpxv are primates and african rodents. in in the democratic republic of congo, a nine-month-old child was infected with mpxv and exhibited symptoms similar to smallpox. although smallpox has been eradicated, different subtypes of the smallpox virus have similar genetic and antigenic properties, and infection with one may produce antibodies against other subtypes. furthermore, human mpxv infection has always been considered a rare and self-limiting disease, and has received little attention. however, the resistance of the population to different viruses has gradually weakened with the cessation of smallpox vaccination in various countries. in recent years, against the background that the general population has started a secondary infection with the novel coronavirus, the number and geographical distribution of human cases infected with mpxv have significantly increased. mpxv is divided into two main genetic clades: clade i, distributed in central africa, and clade ii, unique to west africa. clade i is further subdivided into sub-clades ia and ib, whereas clade ii is subdivided into sub clades iia and iib. these clades vary in their modes of transmission, pathogenicity, and clinical manifestations. clade i human infection is similar to typical smallpox and is characterized by symptoms such as fever, headache, and discomfort. compared to clade ii, clade i exhibits higher transmissibility and virulence, leading to more severe disease manifestations and higher mortality rates. the mortality rate of clade i is as high as %, whereas that of clade iia is lower. unlike clades i and iia, clade iib exhibits increased human-to-human transmission capability. between and mpox outbreaks worldwide were mainly caused by strains of evolutionary clade iib. the outbreak of this epidemic began in and continues to the present day, with particularly significant impacts on some african countries. since may a series of global outbreaks involving clade iib have been recognized by the world health organization as public health emergencies of international concern, marking the launch of global prevention and control mechanisms. in august the number of reported cases peaked globally, making this period the most severe and tense stage of the epidemic. the epidemic has rapidly escalated. as of september a total of confirmed cases have been reported in european union countries, including some european countries and non-traditional measles epidemic areas such as the united states. because the who announced on may that the mpox outbreak was a public health emergency of international concern, this epidemic is far from over. in sharp contrast to this decision, the infection status of sub-clades ia and ib in clade i has significantly increased in the drc and other african countries, indicating the continued threat of these viral clades to public health in these countries. recent studies have shown a significant increase in mpox cases caused by clade i between and with the disease severity being higher than that of clade ii. the drc reported many clade i mpox cases in including the first case in kinshasa, raising concerns about global transmission. as of august the clade ib strain has been detected in multiple countries outside africa, indicating that the spread of the mpxv is gradually increasing. previously, these viruses were prevalent mainly in africa; however, their emergence suggests that more complex transmission networks may be present. due to the surge in mpox cases, the director general of the who declared the current outbreak a pheic on august . this series of events highlights the importance of continuous monitoring and research of different clades and their transmission patterns on a global scale. understanding the epidemiological characteristics, transmission routes, and effective response strategies of these viral clades is crucial.
figure .mpox: journey from viral isolation to global outbreak. from when edward jenner developed the smallpox vaccine using cowpox, to with confirmed cases of mpox globally, the discovery, research, and control of mpox have evolved from vaccine foundations to global attention and breakthroughs in antiviral treatments..
figure .global distribution of mpox cases. since january the total number of laboratory-confirmed mpox cases, which may include cases only confirmed as orthopoxvirus, is . among these, cases are in locations with only clade ii mpox cases are in locations with only clade i mpox virus, and cases are in locations with both clade i and clade ii mpox. data presented as of october were obtained from the cdc. materials and methods to understand the epidemiological characteristics, transmission routes, and effective prevention and control strategies for mpox, we searched multiple databases and resources through literature retrieval. we mainly used academic databases, such as pubmed, web of science, and google scholar, as well as the official documents and reports of the who, centers for disease control and prevention, and health departments of various countries. these resources provide the latest research results on mpox and relevant public health information. the key words included “mpox,” “monkeypox,” and their combinations, such as “mpox and outbreak” and “mpox surveillance and epidemiology.” to ensure coverage of key literature in this field. in order to ensure the relevance of the search results, we set clear inclusion and exclusion criteria: the included literature should clearly involve all aspects of mpox, such as epidemiological characteristics, clinical manifestations, prevention and treatment measures, and be limited to the time range from to now. the language is english or other major languages. all the included literatures were double independently screened to ensure the objectivity and consistency of the literature screening process. through these steps, we aimed to systematically sort and analyse the retrieved data and provide a solid basis for the review. physiological and pathological characteristics of mpox mpxv is an enveloped, double-stranded dna virus. the viral particles were oval or brick shaped, with diameters of approximately –nm. the mpxv genome mainly includes a central conserved region and reverse terminal repeats, and virus-host interaction genes are located in the terminal region. mpxv replication is a complex and precise process that involves interactions between the virus and host cells at multiple stages. mpxv has two main forms: the intracellular mature virus and extracellular envelope virus. the virus enters the host cells through attachment and fusion, and the viral genome is released into the cytoplasm for transcription and replication. during replication, the imv and eev are formed. the imv are assembled in the cytoplasm and released outside the cell by lysis, and part of the imv can be further transformed into the eev. the eev mediates long-distance transmission in hosts by interacting with actin. the imv is responsible for the transmission of infections between hosts. this complex replication process allows mpxv to spread effectively in the host and between cells.
figure .replication cycle of mpox virus. this figure illustrates the life cycle of the mpox within a human cell. the replication cycle of the mpox virus transpires in the cytoplasm of the host cell. subsequent to viral attachment, the virion adheres to and merges with the host cell membrane, resulting in the release of the viral core into the host cell’s cytoplasm. viral particles are formed into intracellular mature viruses, which remain in the cytoplasm as intracellular mature virions or are discharged as extracellular enveloped viruses upon cell lysis. mv can encapsulate an extra envelope and adhere to the cell membrane, subsequently releasing through exocytosis.. the clinical manifestations of mpxv infection are similar to those of smallpox virus infection, which usually include prodromal symptoms such as fever, headache, myalgia, fatigue, sore throat, and subsequent rash. the primary distinction between mpox and smallpox is the presence of lymphadenopathy. approximately % of the patients with mpox have superficial lymphadenopathy, whereas patients with smallpox do not. the rash characteristics of mpox are essential for its identification. notably, mpox rashes have a centrifugal distribution, whereas chickenpox rashes are centripetal. mpox is a self-limiting disease. the incubation period is usually –d, and the disease course lasts for –weeks. deaths primarily occurred in children, pregnant women, and immunodeficient individuals. mpxv infection may involve the oral mucosa, digestive tract, genitalia, conjunctiva, cornea, and other organs. currently, mpox diagnosis usually depends on clinical symptoms and pcr detection of viral dna. there is no specific treatment for this disease, and most treatments are mainly symptomatic or conservative. preventive measures include avoiding contact with infected animals, eating thoroughly cooked meat, avoiding close contact with patients with mpox, and vaccination against smallpox.
figure .pathophysiology and symptoms of mpox. general features such as lymphadenopathy, fever, headache, sweats, sore throat, muscle ache, lack of energy, rash, and genital rashes are seen commonly. complications of mpox include pneumonitis, encephalitis, keratitis, and secondary bacterial infections.. the transmission routes of mpxv are complex and primarily involve animal- and human-to-human modes of transport. animal-to-human transmission routes include contact with infected animal blood, bodily fluids, skin, mucous membranes, scratches, bites from infected animals, or even consumption of infected animal meat. human-to-human transmission primarily occurs through contact with bodily fluids, blood, respiratory droplets, or even through sexual contact with infected individuals. recent studies have revealed that mpxv exhibits a high rate of genetic variation, which may result in unstable epidemiological characteristics, including speed of transmission and pathogenicity of the virus. studies have indicated that viral strains in recent mpox outbreaks differ from typical african strains by approximately nucleotide sites, reflecting significant changes in the viral genome. this variation could lead to various manifestations of mpxv during human-to-human transmission, further complicating the epidemiological profile. therefore, there is an urgent need to accelerate the development of vaccines and medications to effectively control the mpox zepidemic. vaccines can confer immunity, thereby reducing the infection rate and disease severity. in contrast, medications treat individuals who are already infected, reduce complications, and prevent worsening of the disease. the spread of mpox can be effectively curtailed by intensifying the research and development of vaccines and medications.
figure .modes of mpox transmission. mpox can be transmitted through various means, including contact with animals infected with the mpox virus, direct contact with the body fluids or lesions of infected animals, animal bites or scratches, eating meat from infected animals, sexual contact, and contact with contaminated objects, respiratory secretions of infected individuals, as well as their bedding and clothing.. prevention and treatment of mpox mpxv belongs to the orthopoxvirus genus, and its differential diagnosis is complex and important because its clinical manifestations are similar to those of other members of the poxvirus family. pcr is considered the primary diagnostic tool for detecting viral dna. samples scraped from rashes, scabs, or blisters are considered the best specimens and require sterile refrigeration to maintain their stability. additionally, immunohistochemistry, viral culture, and electron microscopy can assist in confirming the presence of the virus. recent studies have shown that individuals are generally susceptible to mpxv and that vaccination with a smallpox vaccine provides a certain degree of cross-protection against mpxv. mpox can be prevented by smallpox or cowpox vaccination. however, currently no specific vaccine exists for the prevention of mpox infections. researchers have only improved the vaccine through gene recombination based on existing vaccines such as smallpox, which has improved its effectiveness and reduced toxicity and side effects. additionally, antiviral drugs have been developed to treat patients with viral infections. preventive effect of vaccines vaccines are vital tools to prevent disease infection, and can effectively control transmission before a disease outbreak and intervene in the development of the disease after disease exposure to reduce its severity. mpxv immunomodulatory proteins can be categorized by function into three separate groups: virostealth, virotransduction, and biomimicry. the virostealth proteins function intracellularly, diminishing the detection of mpx infection signals by disrupting host signalling pathways, hence impairing the ability of cell-mediated immune responses to identify and eliminate virus-infected cells. the virotransducer proteins function intracellularly to suppress innate antiviral signalling pathways and apoptotic responses to mpx infection. viromimetics represent the sole category of mpxv proteins with external functions. viroreceptors are cell surface glycoproteins that imitate host immune-related cytokine and chemokine receptors, binding to them and disrupting their functions, whereas virokines emulate host cytokines and chemokines, hence inhibiting their effects. mpxv immunomodulatory proteins function synergistically to circumvent the host’s antiviral innate immune response via several mechanisms, facilitating viral replication. mpxv and smallpox viruses belong to the genus orthopoxvirus and have significant similarities in genome structure and immune responses. studies have shown that the approved smallpox vaccines also provide cross-protection against mpox. dendritic cells can capture foreign antigens presented by different types of vaccines through phagocytosis, process them in the endoplasmic reticulum, and express their fragments on the cell surface through the major histocompatibility complex. cells directly recognize antigens and initiate humoral immune responses through b-cell receptors. simultaneously, they present antigen peptide fragments to helper t cells via mhc- ii molecules. antigen-presenting cells activate cd4+t cells and promote their differentiation into different subtypes, such as t follicular helper cells, which help b cells differentiate into memory b cells and plasma cells that secrete antibodies, thus promoting the generation of high-affinity antibodies. in addition, cytotoxic t cells recognize antigen peptide fragments presented by mhc-i molecules through the t-cell receptor and trigger a cellular immune response to kill and remove the virus-infected cells. the specific mechanism is illustrated in figure . however, since the global suspension of the smallpox vaccination in the number of individuals without cross-protection has increased, making it a potentially significant threat to human health. therefore, developing an mpox vaccine can prevent another large-scale outbreak of mpox and provide sufficient technical resources for subsequent research on other positive pox vaccines. currently, three smallpox vaccines have been approved for mpox treatment: acam2000, jynneos, and lc16m8. these vaccines were initially developed to prevent smallpox; however, they are also effective against mpox. however, these vaccines have different degrees of side effects, which must be considered.
figure .mpxv virus escape mechanism and vaccine-induced immune response. in viral mimicry, mpxv mimicry inhibits ifn, il-1β, and tnf, as well as host receptors bound by mpxv-encoded chemokines and growth factors. during viral transduction, intracellular mpxv-encoded proteins inhibit its function by interfering with antiviral pathways such as ifn, nf-κb, irf and apoptosis. viral stealth is achieved with f1, an antiapoptotic host-range protein that contributes to viral replication and the spread of mpx infection. approved smallpox vaccines also provide cross-protection against mpox. after further vaccination, the foreign antigens presented by different types of vaccines are captured by dendritic cells through phagocytosis, processed in the endoplasmic reticulum, and processed by the major histocompatibility complex. mhc-i or mhc-ii) express their fragments on the cell surface. the cells directly recognize the antigen and initiate a humoral immune response through b-cell receptors. at the same time, they present antigen peptide fragments to helper t cells through mhc-ii molecules. antigen-presenting cells activate cd4+t cells and promote their differentiation into different subtypes, such as follicular helper t cells, which help b cells differentiate into memory b cells and antigen-secreting plasma cells, thereby promoting the production of high-affinity antibodies. in addition, cytotoxic t cells recognize antigenic peptide fragments presented by mhc-i molecules through t-cell receptors and trigger cellular immune responses to kill and eliminate virus-infected cells.. acam2000 acam2000 is a second-generation smallpox vaccine based on vaccinia virus replication. emergency product development produces it in the united states and is mainly used to prevent smallpox viral infections. this vaccine was approved by the food and drug administration in and is regarded as an essential strategic tool for dealing with smallpox virus outbreaks. acam2000 significantly prevents smallpox infection and exerts a protective effect against mpxv in animal models. studies have found that crab-eating macaques inoculated with acam2000 survive attacks by atomized mpxv. although signs of viral infection were observed, the animals were healthy. humoral and cell-mediated immune responses were initiated and high concentrations of neutralizing and igg antibodies were detected after vaccination. in addition, in a prairie groundhog model evaluating the effect of acam2000 after exposure, acam2000 showed significant effectiveness when applied on the first and third days after exposure. however, the use of acam2000 is accompanied by high-risk side effects, including skin reactions, eye complications, severe heart inflammation, and encephalitis, especially in individuals with a poor immune system or other health problems. therefore, although acam2000 is effective and provides an emergency response in dealing with smallpox virus infections, its use needs to be carefully weighed and evaluated in terms of the potential risk of severe side effects and the need for disease prevention. jynneos jynneos is a non-replicative vaccine made from modified live ankara vaccinia virus. the danish bavarian nordic company prepared this vaccine after more than passages for viral reduction and six rounds of plaque purification. its safety and immunogenicity have been dramatically improved with the aim of treating mpxv infections and preventing smallpox. this vaccine has been approved in the united states and europe. unlike acam2000 and jynneos, these vaccinators do not produce live viruses; therefore, they are safer for use in individuals with poor immune function. however, individuals with poor immune function may have weak protection against jynneos vaccination than healthy people because of their compromised/reduced immune system. in a clinical trial, jynneos reached a peak in immune protection d after the second subcutaneous injection, with a vaccination interval of d. mpxv-neutralizing antibodies were detected in vivo after inoculation with the jynneos vaccine. however, some vaccinators may experience mild adverse reactions, such as tachycardia, palpitations, redness, swelling, pain, and itching at the injection site, which may occasionally be accompanied by fever. severe allergic reactions are relatively rare. although jynneos appears to be a safer choice for the current mpox epidemic, it efficacy and durability remain unknown. according to previous studies, the vaccine efficacy rate was approximately %, which requires further research and monitoring. therefore, when using the jynneos vaccine, especially in individuals with cardiovascular disease or other potential risks, close monitoring and evaluation are required to ensure a balance between safety and effectiveness. lc16m8 lc16m8 is a minimum replication-attenuated live vaccine that was developed in japan in the 1970s. the vaccine was officially licenced by japanese regulatory authorities in and is currently being produced by kaketsuken. the active ingredient of lc16m8 was derived from the lister/elstree strain of cowpox virus. this is mainly caused by a frameshift mutation in the extracellular envelope viral particle antigen b5r, which leads to the expression of a truncated protein, thereby weakening the virulence and replication abilities of the strain. previous animal models have shown that pre-exposure to the lc16m8 vaccine can prevent symptomatic mpxv infection, with a protective effect lasting up to months. for animals with immune dysfunction/deficiency, lc16m8 does not cause severe vaccine-related adverse events, such as progressive cowpox, making it safer than the dryvax/list vaccine. post-exposure vaccination can improve clinical manifestations. human clinical trials have shown that the serum positivity rate for mpxv d after lc16m8 vaccination was %. although the neutralizing titre was lower than that of the dryvax vaccine, it induced a strong cellular immune response with a higher trend of lymphocyte proliferation than dryvax and no serious adverse events occurred. large-scale vaccinations in the 1970s did not result in serious adverse events. however, some vaccinated individuals may experience mild-to-moderate adverse events such as pain and redness at the injection site. there may be limitations or increased risks for individuals with poor immune function and some patients with atopic dermatitis. however, the production and storage of lc16m8 require highly specialized facilities and technology, which may limit its promotion and application in resource-scarce areas. therefore, when choosing a vaccine, comprehensively considering the health status and medical history of an individual is necessary to ensure their safety and health. genetically engineered vaccines many studies have focused on developing genetically engineered vaccines. one vaccine, which combines the vacv lir and a33r genes, showed significant protection in mice. in further studies, the protective effects of vaccines containing the a27l and b5r genes were explored in mice. the results showed that the effects of these vaccines were consistent with previous research results. subsequently, these four genes were combined and a combination vaccine was administered to rhesus monkeys. research has shown that this four-gene combination vaccine can trigger an antibody response to the homologous protein of mpxv, demonstrating the potential of multigene vaccines to prevent mpox. hooper et al. developed a dna vaccine targeting four known vaccinia virus genes and administered it to rhesus monkeys before exposure to mpox. they found that, although single-gene vaccines can help monkeys survive, they cannot effectively protect them from mpox, possibly because of insufficient antibody production to neutralize the virus. however, when these four genes were included in the vaccine, their protective effect was significantly improved, and the virus was not detected in the oral secretions of the monkeys. these results support the critical role of multicomponent vaccine-antigen mixtures in the prevention and treatment of infection with smallpox viruses. simultaneously, hirao et al. conducted relevant research and established experimental groups of eight dna-encoded antigens, including a4l, a27l, a33r, a56r, b5r, f9l, h3l, and l1r. they found that five of these antigens produced high-level antibody reactions in macaques, which is consistent with the results of hooper et al.. furthermore, vaccines against mpox are under active development, such as mrna vaccines targeting mpxv developed by biontech, moderna, and wuhan institute of virology; these vaccines are in the early stages of development and have shown great potential for controlling future mpox transmission. in summary, these studies provide new directions for the development of effective mpox vaccines. therapeutic effect of antiviral drugs for patients with mpxv infection, the cdc recommends the use of tecovirimat, cidofovir, brinciclovir, and varicella immunoglobulin intravenous injection. because tecovirimat, cidofovir, and brinciclovir are genetically similar to members of the orthopoxvirus family, they show potential effectiveness against orthopoxviruses. recent studies have found that vigiv can be used to treat serious complications caused by vaccinia vaccines, such as generalized vaccinia and vaccinia eczema, and is suitable for patients with mpox infections who have poor immune function. although clinical data supporting human mpox infections is lacking, given the restrictions on vaccination and contraindications of some patients, these drugs have become a critical choice in emergency treatment, especially when disease symptoms cannot be effectively alleviated after mpox vaccination. tekverimat tecovirimat is an oral antiviral drug that has been developed by siga technologies and approved by the fda for smallpox treatment. the european drug administration has approved its use for the treatment of infections caused by other orthopoxviruses. it can effectively block further transmission of the virus in the host by inhibiting the function of the envelope protein, vp37, of the orthopoxviruses and preventing the release of viral particles. this drug is administered orally or intravenously. for adults and children weighing at least kg, the oral dose is mg administered twice daily for consecutive days. the intravenous injection dose is adjusted according to the body weight of adult patients. the therapeutic efficacies of the smallpox vaccine acam2000 and tecovirimat administered alone or in combination, starting on day post-infection, were compared in a cynomolgus macaque model of lethal mpox viral infection. post-exposure administration of acam2000 alone did not protect against severe mpox disease or mortality. in contrast, post-exposure treatment with tecovirimat, alone or in combination with acam2000, provided full protection. however, its shortcomings and limitations cannot be ignored, such as insufficient treatment data for human mpox infection and possible side effects, such as headache, nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting, and other gastrointestinal discomfort, as well as reactions at the injection site. in addition, although it has been approved for clinical use, its practical application is limited due to cost and accessibility. cidofovir cidofovir is a broad-spectrum antiviral drug with an active form of a ’- diphosphate metabolite that mainly acts by inhibiting dna polymerase replication. thus, cidofovir is effective against hiv, cowpox, mpox, and smallpox infections. in terms of usage, this drug is mainly administered through local and intravenous injections, with a recommended dose of mg/kg for intravenous injection. common side effects include congenital disability, neutropenia, nausea, and muscle pain. studies have shown that cidofovir can effectively reduce lesion formation and mortality in experimental animal models, especially when used as a second-line treatment for severe cowpox. in addition, cidofovir can limit the production of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in experimental animals, thereby further controlling the severity of viral infection. however, cidofovir may cause nephrotoxicity when administered intravenously; therefore, renal function must be closely monitored and appropriate dose adjustments must be made to reduce the risk of this side effect. cidofovir has shown significant potential for treating viral infections, particularly in immunocompromised individuals or cases of severe infections. however, its side effects and insufficient clinical data limit its application. further research and clinical validation are needed to improve its role in the treatment of mpox and other diseases. brinciclovir brincidofovir, also known as cmx001, inhibits mpxv replication by phosphorylating its active metabolite, cidofovir diphosphate. it is a lipid conjugate of cidofovir and functions as a diphosphate prodrug that explicitly targets dna viruses by selectively inhibiting viral dna polymerase activity. brincidofovir is available for oral consumption in the form of mg tablets or a mg/ml oral suspension, and is typically administered once every alternate week. recent studies have shown that some patients experience adverse reactions due to elevated liver enzymes after treatment with weekly oral doses of mg brincidofovir, leading to non-completion of the entire treatment course. furthermore, gastrointestinal symptoms including diarrhoea, vomiting, and abdominal pain have been linked to its use. brincidofovir has demonstrated significant therapeutic potential in various animal models of mpxv, suggesting that it may be an effective treatment for mpxv infections. additionally, parker et al. showed that a combined treatment of first- and second-generation vaccines and brincidofovir reduced the severity of vaccine-related lesions. in the case of post-exposure prevention, the combined administration of brincidofovir and vaccination should be considered as the first reaction of individuals with uncertain exposure status to a smallpox emergency or as a means to reduce the incidence and severity of vaccine-related adverse events. despite its promising performance in animal models, clinical implementation presents several challenges and constraints. for instance, the elevation of liver enzymes and other gastrointestinal adverse reactions in clinical trials necessitate close monitoring and management. additionally, owing to safety concerns related to drug accumulation, brincidofovir is contraindicated in immunocompromised individuals, pregnant women, and neonates. vigiv vigiv is a hyperimmunoglobulin used to treat the complications of vaccination against cowpox. it originates from plasma and contains high titres of cowpox virus-specific igg antibodies, which are used to neutralize viral particles, thereby reducing viraemia and mortality. studies have shown that vigiv can significantly reduce viraemia and mortality rates by %–%. vigiv is usually used to treat serious complications that may occur after vaccination against cowpox, such as progressive cowpox, systemic cowpox, cowpox dermatitis, and eye infections induced by the cowpox virus. in addition, prophylactic treatment with vigiv can be considered if immunodeficient individuals with severely impaired t-cell function have a history of exposure to the cowpox virus. furthermore, vigiv has shown successful application in some cases, significantly reducing the severity and mortality rate of eye infections caused by the cowpox virus. however, this drug has some drawbacks such as potential effects on blood sugar and insulin levels, and caution should be exercised in patients with renal insufficiency. in addition, although vigiv has been approved for cowpox treatment, its widespread use against other smallpox viral infections, such as mpox, lacks sufficient clinical data. further research is needed to verify its effectiveness and safety in these viral infections. conclusions with continuous changes in the environment and human activities, individuals have significantly increased opportunities to come in contact with potential sources of infection, leading to a rapid increase in the incidence of mpoxes. with the extension and increase in the mpox transmission chain, genetic variation of the mpxv continues, which may further enhance its transmissibility, toxicity, and pathogenicity. therefore, vigilance should be maintained when mpox continues to recur worldwide. outbreaks of potential diseases are often caused by neglecting the disease in its early stages, and every outbreak of a significant disease has an indelible impact on various parts of the world, posing a significant threat to human health. many questions remain regarding human diseases, animal hosts, viruses, and their environments, and more effective prevention and control methods are required. currently, few approved vaccines are available against mpox, and the specific mechanisms of action of effective antiviral drugs require further investigation. therefore, there is an urgent need to accelerate the development of novel vaccines and antiviral agents. in addition, implementing more robust preventive measures and reliable diagnostic tools to identify mpox and control the further spread of the virus is necessary.
virology, epidemiology, transmissions, diagnostic tests, prophylaxis and treatments of human mpox: saudi arabia perspective abstract mpox is a highly contagious viral disease that can be transmitted from animal-to-human or human-to-human through intimate contact, mpox is caused by the monkeypox virus, which is an enveloped double-stranded dna that belongs to the genus orthopoxvirus, poxviridae family, and subfamily chordopoxvirinae. mpox cases were previously only reported in west and central africa, however in recent times non-endemic countries including saudi arabia also reported confirmed mpox cases. the first laboratory-confirmed human mpox case in sa was reported on july since then a number of confirmed mpox cases have been reported by who in sa. these confirmed mpox cases in sa were observed among individuals with a history of visiting european union countries. sa is not only at risk of importation of mpox cases owing to travel to such countries, but also there are various other risk factors including geographic proximity to the african continent, trade in exotic animals, and massive inflow of tourists. therefore, government health authorities of sa should continue to collaborate with various international health organizations including who to prevent, manage or monitor potential health risks at most of the entry points in sa including highways, seaports, and airports by ensuring adherence to hygiene protocols, vaccinations, and health screenings. there are a range of diagnostic tests are currently available that can be used in sa to confirm mpox infections, including real-time pcr, loop-mediated isothermal amplification, serological testing, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat-crispr-associated protein -based systems, whole-genome sequencing, electron microscopy, and virus isolation and culture. there is no approved treatment specifically for mpox, however multiple approved antiviral agents for smallpox treatment were found to be useful in mpox treatment and in the management of mpox outbreaks, such as- trifluridine, brincidofovir, tecovirimat, and cidofovir. the aim of this review is to provide valuable insights regarding virology, pathogenesis, epidemiology, transmissions, clinical presentation, diagnostic tests, prophylactic measures and therapeutic options of mpox from sa perspective. moreover, a side-by-side discussion on the global trend and scenarios of mpox has been provided for comparison and further improvement in measures against mpox in sa. introduction mpox is a viral infectious disease caused by the mpox virus, which is an enveloped double-stranded dna virus that belongs to the poxviridae family of the genus orthopoxvirus. mpxv infects a range of animals including non-human primates, such as monkeys, dogs, squirrels, rodents, and others. in mpox was first identified in monkeys reserved for research in an animal facility in denmark. humans are accidental hosts of mpxv and the first human mpox case was documented in the democratic republic of the congo in . mpox cases were initially common in the african countries including drc, sierra leone, liberia, central african republic, south sudan, gabon, nigeria, and cameroon. however, an increased number of human cases of mpox was reported in all continents in . both u.s. centers for disease control and prevention and world health organization have classified mpox as an emerging disease because of its rapid dissemination and high infectivity. in addition, between july and may who declared mpox as a public health emergency of international concern. from january to october the who has already reported laboratory-confirmed mpox cases and deaths in countries. over the past four decades, multiple factors have contributed in the increased incidences of the mpox outbreak. smallpox immunization program discontinuance is one such factor. it has been demonstrated that the smallpox vaccine can provide up to around % effectiveness in preventing mpox. extensive intake of animal meat as a protein source particularly in the civil war and poverty-stricken regions, where the animal is a potential reservoir of mpxv. other factors that are playing a role in increasing mpox cases include elevated exposure to reservoir animals, environmental and ecological conditions, the ease of transboundary travel, and the growing human population worldwide. interestingly, various meteorological factors also play a major role in mpox cases, where temperature is found to be positively linked with mpox cases and wind speed is negatively linked. there is also a link between mpox cases and obesity, where increased occurrence of mpox has been observed in obese individuals. mpox was previously only reported in west and central africa, however in recent times non-endemic countries also reported confirmed mpox cases including the saudi arabia and its neighboring countries. the first laboratory-confirmed human mpox case in sa was reported on july and a total of confirmed mpox cases were reported by who as of june . in sa, confirmed mpox cases were observed among individuals with a history of visiting european union countries. sa is not only at risk of importation of mpox cases owing to travel to such countries, but also there are various other risk factors including geographic proximity to the african continent, trade in exotic animals, and massive inflow of tourists. moreover, unlike earlier outbreaks, it has been observed that there is also a change in the nature of mpox epidemiology and an increased number of older and middle-aged adults are being affected by this infectious disease. since who has declared mpox as a health emergency, therefore the ministry of health in sa has developed some guidelines and preventive measures to prevent the spread and transmission of mpxv including targeted use of the 2nd or 3rd-generation mpox or smallpox vaccines, the use of typical polymerase chain reaction techniques, timely screening with nucleic acid amplification testing, and tracing and isolating mpox affected individuals. this review aims to provide valuable insights regarding virology, pathogenesis, epidemiology, transmissions, clinical presentation, diagnostic tests, prophylactic measures and therapeutic options of mpox from sa perspective. moreover, a side-by-side discussion on the global trend and scenarios of mpox have been provided for comparison and further improvement in measures against mpox in sa. virology of mpxv classification mpxv is an enveloped double-stranded dna that belongs to the genus orthopoxvirus, poxviridae family, and subfamily chordopoxvirinae. mpxv is closely related to cowpox virus, vaccinia virus, and variola virus. clade i or congo basin clade and clade ii or west african clade are the distinct mpxv phylogenetic clades. there are subclasses of clade ii including clade iia and clade iib. in general, the genomic sequences of clade i and clade ii derived mpxv strains show an overall % identity of nucleotides within the same region, while % nucleic acid identity across different geographical clusters. genomic organization and morphology of mpxv the genome of mpxv is around kb and possesses over open reading frames, with inverted terminal repeats flanking the terminal ends. a minimum of orfs are essential for the poxvirus replication and morphogenesis. a number of non-essential orfs are supposed to have a significant contribution in the alterations in poxvirus host tropism, pathogenesis, and immunomodulation, while the functions of most of the orfs are yet to be characterized. the virions of mpxv have an average size of nm × nm and they are either oval or barrel-shaped. a unique dumbbell-shaped nucleoprotein core is present in poxvirus mature particles and they contain a large genome composed of double-stranded linear dna. moreover, mpxv virions possess virus-encoded dna-dependent rna polymerases and more than viral structural and membrane proteins. essential orthopoxvirus genes are found in the central portion of the mpxv genome. nonetheless, as compared to the genomes of other opvs, a small number of orfs are either truncated or lost in the genome of mpxv. multiple disrupted orfs encoding genes associated with immune evasion have been reported in clade ii, where these mutations might be responsible for the lesser virulence of clade ii in comparison with clade i. the extracellular enveloped virus and intracellular mature virus are the different infectious mpxv forms. these infectious forms are also different in terms of cell-infecting mechanisms and surface glycoproteins. imv is released during cell lysis, while eev is accountable for early dispersal. the major structural difference between eev and imv is that the additional outermost membrane layer is not present in imv. there is also a difference in the quantities of viral proteins incorporated into the types of virions. mpxv replicates through a complex process, however it is generally thought to be similar to that of other opvs. the entry receptors of mpxv are yet to be fully discovered. nonetheless, it is supposed that the entry of mpxv is reliant on host cell type as well as viral strain as well as involves many surface receptors including chondroitin sulfate or heparan sulfate. epidemiology of mpxv global epidemiology during the time of initial identification, human cases were reported in zaire between and . the age range of the affected individuals was from month to years, where % of them were under years of age. however, there was an % mortality rate in unvaccinated patients along with an increased rate in children, while no death was reported in vaccinated individuals. a study also reported an increased case fatality rate among the young children as compared to general population. immunization against smallpox typically provides protection against mpox, however smallpox eradication and consequent reduction in the vaccination campaign hindered the cross-protective immunity against mpox. lack of proper mpxv reporting from rural africa leads to an underestimated threatening potential of mpxv. following an under-reported period of years in nigeria’s bayelsa state, mpxv re-emerged in which was then supposedly exported to israel and other countries through travelers. subsequently, the number of mpox cases were increased in and . a number of factors played a role in the mpxv outbreak outside africa including direct contact with infected monkeys, travelling, shipping, and importation, or susceptible populations with a risk of contracting mpox. moreover, smallpox vaccine cessation might also have contributed in increased mpxv transmission from human-to-human. mpxv outbreaks outside africa indicate the global connection of mpox infection. thus, measures are needed to promote diagnosis and monitoring to find out the fluctuating epidemiology of mpox. mpox not only affected africa, but also developed countries. in the u.s., two mpox cases were observed the persons who returned from nigeria to texas in july . on may a british man was also found to be mpox infected, after his visit to nigeria. as of september more than thousand confirmed cases, including in europe and north america, have been reported. mpox is commonly detected in western and central africa; however mpox cases have been reported in developed countries as well, which indicates that mpxv is spreading globally. according to who definitions, a suspected case is someone who is a contact of a confirmed or probable mpox case in the days before the onset of symptoms or signs including fatigue, profound weakness, back pain, myalgia, headache, acute onset of fever. on the other hand, a probable case is someone who exhibits lymphadenopathy, mucosal lesions, unexplained acute skin rash, and has a positive test result for orthopoxviral infection, had several and/or casual sexual partners in the weeks before onset of symptoms, and has an epidemiological link to a confirmed or probable case of mpox in the days before onset of symptoms. a confirmed mpox case requires laboratory-confirmed mpox virus by detection of unique mpox dna sequences through real-time pcr and/or sequencing. all mpxv-infected cases took place because of travelling to africa or through animal shipping. in the u.s. alone, around probable and confirmed cases and mortalities have been reported. collectively, these findings suggest that mpox is a global threat, which further indicates the necessity of developing a strategic plan to avert mpox from becoming a pandemic. saudi arabia epidemiology limited data is available regarding mpox epidemiology in sa. assiri et al. investigated the continued mpox occurrence in sa after removal of public health emergency of mpox by who. the researchers investigated cases of mpox in sa from may to september . they found that .% of the mpox-affected individuals are males with an average age of .years. out of individuals, individuals were not associated with secondary cases, individuals refused engagement in extra-marital sex, and of them did not report travelling. headache was experienced by individuals, while fever was present in cases. in terms of lesions, the most commonly affected areas include the mouth, face, genitals, and palms and soles. all of the genotyped samples were found to be subclade iib. in a different study at king saud medical city, dar et al. provided a detailed report of confirmed mpox cases detected in riyadh, sa between june and september . the diagnosis and management of confirmed and suspected cases were carried out by following guidelines developed by saudi public health authority, among these laboratory-confirmed cases, were saudi, pakistani, bangladeshi, indian and one yemini. in addition, out of affected individuals are migrant workers in sa for over year. the average age of the confirmed individuals was .years and of them were males. no mortality or substantial complications were reported among the patients. pathogenesis of mpxv mpox is a highly contagious disease that can be transmitted from animal-to-human or human-to-human through close contact of any kind, which is regarded as the first step in the pathogenesis and pathogenicity of mpxv. there are several ways through which mpxv can be transmitted from person to person. different modes of transmission have been further discussed in the “transmission of mpxv” section. the entry of mpxv particles into host cells is the first step of viral pathogenesis in humans. a number of studies have been carried out to elucidate the interaction between mpxv and response of host cells, which suggests significant genetic diversity in the clade-specific genes across clade i and ii. indeed, this variation plays a role in the pathogenicity showed by these entities. mpxv genome is composed of several genes that are responsible for encoding host-response modifier proteins. mpox inhibitor of complement enzymes are considered as the virulence factors of mpxv. it has been observed that the mopice protein has a significant contribution in elevating pathogenicity in the case of clade i, while clade ii is lacking this protein. in the human body, mpxv can be introduced through various routes, such as intradermal routes, respiratory routes, or during sexual intercourse. on august the public health authority released a statement that no clade i case has been detected in sa. the mpxv multiplies at the site of inoculation and then spreads into blood, lymph nodes, bone marrow, spleen, and tonsils, which eventually results in primary viremia and mpxv transportation into skin and testes. it has been revealed by in vivo studies that the primary sites of mpxv replication include lymphoid tissues in the throat and neck. following this primary mpxv replication, it further infects the liver and spleen. mpxv also infects langerhans cells, dendrites, and macrophages, which eventually results in inflammation of keratinocytes and fibroblasts. mpxv enters or invades the host cells either through macropinocytosis or a fusion mechanism. indeed, the mpxv entry and release mechanisms are complicated owing to the co-occurrence of two different viral forms including imv and eev, which are enclosed by diverse lipid bilayers and show characteristic surface proteins. transmission of mpxv some primates and rodents in central africa serve as the natural mpox hosts. early mpxv infections took place owing to contact with infected animals, such as consumption of undercooked meat or exposure to tissues, body fluids, and mucous membranes. in addition, mpxv transmission can take place via bites or scratches from infected animals. direct contact with respiratory droplets from infected persons is thought to be responsible for mpxv human-to-human transmission. moreover, vertical transmission of mpxv can take place from infected mothers to their infants. unlike previous mpox outbreaks, the recent outbreak was the major reported mpox outbreak outside of africa. previously, mpxv infection was only observed following traveling to mpox-affected counties or after contact with infected animals. nonetheless, most of the confirmed mpox cases of the current outbreak are not linked with travelling or direct contact with infected animals, but rather linked with sexual intercourse between individuals. furthermore, it was observed that most of the mpox cases were detected in bisexual or homosexual males. it has also been reported that % of the mpox cases were observed among bisexual or homosexual males and % of them had co-infection with human immunodeficiency virus. moreover, % of the lesions were observed in the genital and anal regions. substantial challenges for accurate diagnosis are faced because of this prolonged incubation period, which can further result in further mpxv transmission, disease progression, and delayed medical attention. clinical presentation mpox infections can widely vary ranging from self-limiting and mild illness to a severe form of the disease in immunocompromised individuals with life-threatening conditions. the average mpxv incubation period ranges from days to weeks. on the other hand, the average incubation period during the clade iib outbreak was found to range from -days. after an asymptomatic incubation period and before the appearance of a rash, mpox patients usually have prodromal symptoms for -days including headache, malaise, myalgias, lymphadenopathy, and fever. nonetheless, the timing of prodromal symptoms was found to be variable during the clade iib outbreak, which arose after, before, or during the occurrence of the rash or other presenting symptoms. painful skin lesion is the most common mpox clinical feature that consistently advances through four distinct stages over two to four weeks. typically, lesions start as macules and develop into pustules, vesicles, and papules, which desquamate and crust in the final stage. individuals with mpox remain infectious from the onset of clinical symptoms till all skin lesions are re-epithelialized, which usually takes up to four weeks. mpox rash typically takes place in a centrifugal distribution, where lesions are observed in limbs, trunk, and face. nonetheless, in the recent global outbreak, mpxv transmission predominantly occurred through sexual contact, which often resulted in anogenital and genital as well as oral and perioral lesions, along with painful mucosal lesions at any site, limited lesions, and nonuniform development of lesions. other complications including ocular disease, urethritis, pharyngitis, and proctitis were also observed in mpox individuals. in addition, less than % of mpox individuals show mucosal symptoms without skin lesions or a single skin lesion without other symptoms. in healthcare workers, localized single lesions were reported at the site of a needle-stick injury. mpox scenario in saudi arabia in sa, the first laboratory-confirmed human mpox case was reported on july in riyadh and a total of confirmed cases as of june . indeed, preventive measures are essential to prevent the mpxv transmission, which will further prevent an upcoming pandemic. in the beginning, there were no explicit guidelines for monitoring and regulating the transmission of mpxv in sa. however, subsequently the saudi arabian moh developed guidelines and implemented measures to control and monitor mpxv transmission in sa. saudi arabian moh contributed significantly in implementing and coordinating steps to regulate the covid-pandemic in sa through international collaborations, vaccination campaigns, public communication, resource allocation, policy decisions, and influential leadership, which further resulted in decreased severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus transmission and eventually protected public health. in a similar manner, saudi arabian moh also has taken measures to control the spread of mpxv. if there is any suspected or confirmed mpox case, it is more likely that moh will take various preventive measures including contact tracing, isolation of the infected individuals, and monitoring of healthcare workers who might have come into the contact of mpxv. moh has also conducted various public awareness campaigns to raise public awareness regarding the mpox signs and symptoms in order to prevent mpox transmission. moreover, moh has also considered offering the smallpox vaccines to high-risk populations, including healthcare professionals and people travelling to regions or countries where mpox is endemic. in a study in sa, alshahrani et al. assessed the knowledge level of doctors about the mpox. they reported that participant doctors exhibited highest knowledge level in clinical presentation .% and disease transmission .%. nonetheless, the participants showed a lower level of knowledge in control and preventive measures. in addition, most of the participants showed positive attitudes toward controlling and preventing mpxv, where .% of participants believed that with appropriate preventive measures, mpox could be effectively controlled. collectively, these findings suggested that it is essential to ameliorate the knowledge level of saudi arabian healthcare professionals regarding mpox for effective control and prevention. moreover, these measures not only will facilitate early identification and management of mpox cases, but also the prevention of mpox outbreaks. in a different study, meo et al. assessed the attitudes, knowledge, awareness, public perception, and acceptance of immunization against pandemic threats including mpox among study participants from riyadh, sa. the researchers summarized that an increased number of study participants in favor of vaccination campaigns and implementation of preventive measures against mpox. therefore, improving public awareness and increased availability of information regarding mpox are like to have significant contributions in strengthening the community to combat mpxv infections and lower the impact of mpox in sa. over .million pilgrims visited sa to perform hajj and umrah in alone, therefore it was challenging for responsible authorities to screen each traveler. therefore, government health authorities of sa should strongly collaborate with various international health organizations including who to prevent, manage or monitor potential health risks at most of the entry points in sa including highways, seaports, and airports by ensuring adherence to hygiene protocols, vaccinations, and health screenings. diagnostic testing for mpxv that can be used in saudi arabia real-time pcr any person satisfying the definition of a suspected case ought to be offered testing as per the guidelines of the u.s. cdc and who. in the case of lab-based diagnosis of mpox, rt-pcr is regarded as the gold standard diagnostic method for samples derived from either wild animals or parents. a number of rt-pcr assays have been established for mpxv diagnosis after the emergence of mpox. these rt-pcr methods have been developed for different targets in the mpxv genome including n3r, b6r, f3l, b7r, g2r, and tnf receptor gene. clinical samples were used to evaluate the diagnostic validation. most of the rt-pcr tests have a limit of detection in the range of to copies per reaction. u.s. food and drug administration has granted emergency use authorization of rt-pcr-based tests so far. loop-mediated isothermal amplification although rt-pcr is regarded as the gold standard diagnostic method for mpox, there are several drawbacks of these methods, such as the need for consistent access to electricity, technical expertise, long sample processing time, and usage of an advanced thermocycler for identification and amplification of mpxv genome. therefore, rt-pcr is inappropriate for dispersed applications, especially in middle- and low-income countries. easy-to-use as well as reliable assays and point-of-care testing are required to combat mpox, particularly as the mpox circulates in middle- and low-income countries. considering all these issues, isothermal techniques including loop-mediated isothermal amplification might be the most outstanding methods for rapid mpox detection. lamp is a powerful, simple, low-cost, and rapid technique for rapid nucleic acid amplification at an isothermal and single temperature, which indicates that this method can be performed without the need for expensive equipment. collectively, these features are extremely preferable for poct usage in areas with limited laboratory facilities. serological testing when a test is carried out in isolation, it is advised to use serology for the clinical mpxv diagnosis to detect antibodies in serum or plasma. the effectiveness of serological tests specific for mpxv is decreased via the potential for cross-reactivity with antibodies against other opvs and those exhibited via vaccination, whether historical or recent. therefore, it is indicated that serological testing should be limited to reference laboratories till further validation is given for the usage of serological or antibody-detecting pocts outside such settings. when a serologically validated testing facility is available within a reference laboratory, the igm detection in recently acutely ill individuals or igg detection in paired serum specimens obtained at least weeks apart from the initial sample collection during the first week of illness can enhance the accuracy of the diagnostic method, when results of other tests are inconclusive. in the diagnostic framework, this technique highlights the importance of serology and its potential uses in certain conditions and within the limits of application standards and rigorous validation. crispr/cas-based systems crispr-cas systems are alternative emerging approaches of nucleic acid detection techniques that have simple device structure, high sensitivity and specificity, and outstanding compatibility with several methods for readout including fluorescence or lateral flow assays. extensive advancement has been achieved in the design of molecular diagnostic-based approaches by utilizing crispr/cas components. the crispr/cas systems detect viral nucleic acids based on their dna or rna sequences and then eradicate them by utilizing cas enzyme-associated endonuclease function. the two groups of crispr systems were rapidly utilized for diagnostic purposes including dna endonuclease-targeted crispr trans reporter and specific high-sensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking. several studies already reported the potential of crispr-cas systems in the detection of mpox. whole-genome sequencing wgs is a powerful, next-generation, and comprehensive sequencing technology that sequences the entire genome of an organism. wgs is considered as the most precise method in distinguishing mpxv from other opvs, which provides extensive coverage of pathogens beyond other molecular techniques. this method also promotes advanced virological study, allows comprehensive bioinformatic investigations, and the design as well as development of relevant immunoassays. wgs is a powerful method for detecting unknown transmission chains, specific genetic variants and strains, and possibly revealing the origin of an outbreak. genetic evolution of mpxv can also be traced by analyzing wgs data, which can provide more data on mpxv adaptation across varied environments and hosts as well as detection of genetic markers for severe disease manifestations or antiviral resistance. furthermore, wgs allows high-resolution mapping of mpxv biogeography and phylogeny and deducing patterns of the mpxv migration by comparing genome sequences derived from a range of outbreaks. there is a growing interest on wgs because of its potential in epidemiologic research, vaccine development, disease treatment, and development of targeted outbreak control and prevention approaches. nonetheless, operational cost of wgs is high and it needs extensive computational resources, which restricts its uses in large-scale testing. there are several challenges in wgs applications, such as scientific, ethical, and practical considerations, as well as the requirement of thoughtful policymaking and constant development. thus, wgs is not suitable as poct because of these limitations. wgs mainly benefits specific case investigations and research initiatives as well as the creation of mpxv databases to enhance findings. electron microscopy electron microscopy can mediate the visual detection of potential mpxv within specimens. nonetheless, because of the need for expensive research facilities, the requirement of specific technical expertise, and the emergence of more available molecular methods, this method is not widely used in mpxv diagnosis. therefore, electron microscopy is not routinely used in the diagnosis of poxviruses. virus isolation and culture virus isolation and culture are time-consuming approaches that can be useful in diagnosing mpox. this method can provide comprehensive characterization via sequencing, which can provide vital insights crucial for the developments of clinical applications, vaccines, research methodologies, and antiviral testing. mpxv isolation from important cases can mediate outbreak investigation and control measures via detecting the mpxv origin, reconstructing transmission chains, and pinpointing mutations via phenotypic and genomic comparisons among isolates. indeed, mpxv shows vigorous growth in various mammalian cell lines including rk-bsc-vero, and hela, as well as in chicken embryos. in chicken embryos, mpxv stimulates cytopathic activities in the chorioallantois membranes, which is more prominent in –days post-inoculation, including syncytium formation, cytoplasmic bridging, granulation, and cell rounding. on the other hand, typical detached and rounded cells become more noticeable in vero cells within around h, which allows identification of virus particles by specific antibodies and immunofluorescence. notwithstanding the accuracy of this method, this method is not widely used because of the need for high-level biosafety labs, the risk of infection even after wearing adequate personal protection, the necessity for skilled personnel, and the extensive detection timeframe. prophylactic measures that can be taken in saudi arabia to prevent mpox pre-exposure prophylaxis individuals people in sa might also play a role in limiting mpxv transmission in various ways. confirmed or suspected individuals ought to stay home and avoid contact with other people. immunocompetent people with mild mpox symptoms ought to avoid contact with other people for to weeks. in addition, healthy individuals ought to avoid intimate contact with mpox-infected individuals. people should also maintain cough etiquettes, wear a fitted mask, practice good hand hygiene, and sneeze with a piece of cloth or tissue or by bending arms. appropriate disinfection and cleaning of high-touch areas are suggested after having home visitors. moreover, practicing safe sexual intercourse and having less sexual partners might help in limiting mpxv transmission. according to the cdc, around half of the individuals who are at greater risk have changed their sexual activities and the number of their sexual partners. surveillance systems and public awareness campaigns health electronic surveillance network is an electronic health information system of sa, that provides various public health data including immunization, vaccination, and epidemic outbreak. according to ministry of health strict guidelines, any suspected mpox cases must need to be reported by the healthcare facilities using hesn. this surveillance system ought to monitor suspected cases in sa and travelers from areas where mpox is endemic. confirmed or suspected mpox cases ought to be isolated to avert the transmission of mpox to others, this isolation is especially crucial in healthcare facilities where the risk of mpxv transmission is higher. public awareness campaigns also need to be conducted by the sa government to educate the community regarding the mpox signs and symptoms and methods to avert mpxv transmission. healthcare workers mpox prevention in clinical settings is more challenging since the healthcare workers remain in contact with infected individuals. appropriate personal protective equipment including gowns, masks, and gloves should be provided to healthcare workers to provide protection from mpox exposure. immediate masking of the confirmed or suspected individuals is also essential. furthermore, skin lesions of the affected individuals also need to be covered with a cloth or gown and these individuals need to be isolated preferably in a negative-pressure-containing single-person room in the hospital. workers should wear gloves while handling the laundry of mpox-infected individuals. vaccines there is no mpox-specific vaccine available currently. however, studies have reported that smallpox vaccines can provide up to % protection against mpox. moreover, epidemiological data suggest that increased occurrence of mpox was observed in individuals who were born post-smallpox pandemic and eradication period or never been infected by poxviruses or never received smallpox vaccination in childhood. at present, there are approved smallpox vaccines used against mpox. pre- and post-prophylaxis immunizations for a certain group of people are recommended by various healthcare authorities including the advisory committee and immunization practices. fda-approved vaccines including jynneos™ and acam2000® are recommended for healthcare professionals who are supposedly exposed to opvs. these healthcare professionals include scientists researching clinical mpox samples, diagnostic and vaccination teams, response teams against outbreaks, clinical personnel associated with viral disease management, and laboratory workers as well as technicians. therefore, proper vaccination guidelines should be developed in sa to ensure the safety of these healthcare professionals. in addition to the aforementioned vaccines, aventis pasteur smallpox vaccine is also approved for emergency uses when the two other vaccines are unavailable or contradicted for application. smallpox vaccines were previously effectively used to prevent mpox. as there is no report or literature currently available that shows the use of smallpox vaccine by the sa health authorities in saudi arabia, therefore sa government might offer smallpox vaccine to high-risk groups, including healthcare workers and individuals travelling to regions where mpox is known to occur. collectively, sa health authorities should continue to collaborate with international organizations including who to implement preventive strategies and measures to efficiently control the spread of mpxv in order to avoid the next mpox pandemic. post-exposure prophylaxis post-exposure prophylaxis is recommended for individuals following their contact with the skin or mucous membrane of an infected person or with their bedding, clothing, oral cavity, lesions, saliva, and bodily fluids. people can be exposed to mpxv through viral presence in air particles and aerosol secretions, when they share a close space for a longer period. moreover, cdc and fda recommend post-exposure vaccination only for high-degree exposures, where there is a possible risk of contracting mpxv. furthermore, the deficiency of medical masks and protective gloves or contact-used material without post- and pre-exposure sanitization is a condition that necessitates and sensitizes vaccination. it is recommended to go through monitoring or diagnosis before post-exposure prophylaxis, in cases of lower exposure rates or uncertain exposure. mpxv transmission can occur due to extended interaction with symptomatic individuals or infected animals. therefore, according to cdc, post-exposure immunization should be carried out after around days and within –days to prevent mpox development. however, if vaccination is conducted after weeks, only the disease burden can be reduced but the onset of mpox cannot be averted. therapeutics for mpox treatment that can be used in saudi arabia antiviral agents trifluridine trifluridine is a thymidine analog that acts as an antiviral drug by suppressing dna synthesis. this antiviral drug suppresses dna polymerase and also gets incorporated into dna molecules, nonetheless, trifluridine action might lack selectivity. in the case of mpox, this drug is only used as a topical preparation on the eyes of infected individuals. trifluridine does not cross the intact cornea, therefore it is considered safe when this drug is used as eye drops. nonetheless, this drug might cross the cornea and be noticeable in aqueous humor in case of corneal pathologies disrupting its structure. various mild adverse reactions have been reported with the use of trifluridine, including allergy, inflammation of the cornea, oedema of the eyelids, and temporary local burning sensation. the dosing interval of trifluridine is hours until the complete regeneration of corneal epithelium. after the regeneration, it might be taken once every hours for another week. nevertheless, trifluridine is not recommended to be used for a longer term. alternative drugs might be selected if treatment is required beyond weeks. cash-goldwasser et al. and perzia et al. carried out studies with trifluridine in the mpox treatment. nonetheless, this drug was used by the researchers in these studies as an add-on agent. in general, participants received both tecovirimat and trifluridine. mpox clinical presentations of four participants varied greatly, but all of them exhibited ophthalmological manifestations. these patients quickly recovered and were discharged. however, reduced visual acuity and worsened ocular symptoms were exhibited by one patient. overall, no adverse events were observed with trifluridine. brincidofovir brincidofovir is a prodrug of cidofovir that acts as an antiviral drug by selectively suppressing the activity of opv dna polymerase. therefore, this drug was found to be efficient against dna viruses. brincidofovir is a lipid conjugate of cidofovir. it has been observed that lipid acylic nucleoside phosphonate plays a role as a phospholipid in the body and reduces the development of lesions with no confirmed effect with coupled vaccination. patients were reported to be completely recovered with minimal side effects. therefore, this drug is approved to treat cytomegalovirus retinitis in hiv individuals and also approved to treat smallpox and other related infections. brincidofovir is also a preferred drug for widespread administration during an emergency mpox outbreak. as compared to cidofovir, brincidofovir has no reported nephrotoxicity and provides better oral bioavailability, thus brincidofovir received approval for oral administration. nonetheless, the profile of liver enzymes needs to be strictly monitored and liver function tests need to be carried out for the treatment. moreover, brincidofovir is not recommended for newborns, pregnant women, and immunocompromised individuals because of the hyperactive drug accumulation. animal studies already demonstrated its effectiveness against mpox, however more clinical studies are required for proper licensure and approval. tecovirimat tecovirimat is an antiviral agent, which originally received fda approval in to treat smallpox infection. tecovirimat can block the formation of the viral envelope by suppressing p37 polypeptide, which is a highly conserved sequence among all opvs. as mpxv is an opv, therefore tecovirimat might exhibit an antiviral role against mpox. mpox patients in the u.s. can obtain tecovirimat from state, county, or city health authorities through an fda- and cdc-approved expanded access–investigational new drug protocol. cidofovir cidofovir is effective against several dna viruses and it acts as an antiviral drug by terminating dna polymerase-based replication in the form of ′-diphosphorylated metabolite. cidofovir was found to be effective against infections caused by smallpox, mpox, vacv, and hiv. routes of administration of cidofovir include intravenous and topical routes. indeed, cidofovir not only reduces the symptoms by preventing the formation of lesions, but also decreases mortality rates. in addition, cidofovir is used to treat severe vacv as a second-line therapy. cidofovir was found to result in nephrotoxicity following iv administration, this drug should be administered along with probenecid and adequate hydration. furthermore, proper dose adjustment along with renal functional considerations are needed to manage nephrotoxicity. nonetheless, more clinical studies are required with cidofovir to confirm its potential against mpox. immunomodulators monoclonal antibodies are commonly used to treat orthopoxvirus infections, which can also be used to treat severe infections caused by mpxv. it has been revealed that interferon beta can significantly suppress the mpox generation and spread. therefore, recombinant beta can be used as a safe and novel agent in mpox treatment. more mabs also need to be developed to elevate the potency of immunoglobulin therapy and/or specific antiviral drugs that may ameliorate outcomes of individuals with severe combined immunodeficient individuals. immunoglobulin therapy in vaccinia immunoglobulin iv was first approved for clinical uses in treating complications associated with the use of smallpox vaccinations. several recombinant immunoglobulins are currently being studied. rvigs act in a strategic passive immunotherapy manner. vig’s two iv formulations including vigiv dynport and vigiv cangene are being studied and yet to be licensed. it was previously utilized effectively in refractive cases. as a hyperimmune immunoglobulin, it plays a role in neutralizing virus particles and decreasing viremia and mortality rates by up to % to %. in order to develop passive immunity, antibodies are obtained from the plasma of smallpox-immune people. it is also used in individuals with immunodeficiency, since it has adequate maltose to perhaps raises revaccination needs, needs attention for renal insufficient profiles, might interfere with serological testing, and affect insulin levels and glycemic conditions. since there is a lack of human trial data regarding mpox treatment, therefore more studies are required in this regard. challenges and future perspectives despite being a member of the dna virus family, mpox shows incredibly greater genomic variability because of elevated nucleotide polymorphism. increased international travel and rapid population mobility have mediated the spread of mpox among people, which is further facilitating its potential for mutation. in addition, these factors also play a role in drug resistance, increased variability, and appearance of multidrug-resistant strains of the mpox virus. future studies on mpox in sa can result in a better understanding of mpox and its potential to cause public health threats, which will also reduce knowledge gaps. a future mpox pandemic might involve a serious burden in the case of economic development, social activities, education systems, and healthcare facilities. although there is a deficiency of information regarding the specific impact of a mpox pandemic, some findings indicated the need for assessment of the economic burden of mpox treatment in healthcare settings, such as costs associated with hospitalization, public health interventions, medications, and diagnostics. analysis of these factors in sa might aid the estimation of financial resources needed for effective mpox outbreak management. moreover, investigation is also required for the potential mpox impact on the productivity of the workforce in various sectors because of reduced productivity, absenteeism, and illness. conclusions in this review, important insights have been provided regarding epidemiology, transmissions, clinical presentation, diagnostic tests, prophylactic measures and therapeutic options of mpox from sa perspective. recent mpox outbreaks around the world have emphasized the necessity for vigilant and constant monitoring in sa. mpox cases in sa were found to be travel-associated and showed potential close contact and heterosexual transmission. novel therapeutic and prophylactic measures are also needed to be continuously appraised for the potential implications in sa. selective usage of smallpox vaccines in the sa population can also be considered to limit mpxv spread. moreover, lessons learned from the covid-pandemic should be applied in the containment and management of mpox in sa.
monkeypox virus: who's second public health emergency of international concern within years abstract an upsurge of monkeypox disease cases with clade i virus in central africa led who to declare a public health emergency of international concern for a second time shortly after the worldwide clade ii mpox epidemic in /among homosexual men. in the democratic republic of congo, the annual incidence of clade i mpox, transmitted mostly from animal sources to children, increased ‐fold between and ; mpox cases occurred between and . the incidence again doubled between and showing a case fatality rate of .%. a new clade ib virus was detected in in eastern drc where mostly adults were infected by heterosexual contact. ib was recently introduced and showed a mutation spectrum of human‐to‐human transmission. asymptomatic mpox infections, the release of infectious virus before symptom onset in a subgroup of cases, and superspreaders complicate containment measures during the epidemic. isolation of cases until two consecutive negative pcr tests was recommended but necessitates cheap and rapid diagnostic tests which are in development. sexual behavioural changes during the epidemic have contributed more to the curbing of the epidemic than vaccination. the smallpox vaccine dryvax protected children exposed to clade i mpox in drc in the 1980s. the attenuated third‐generation smallpox modified vaccinia ankara vaccines and derivatives showed robust protection against clade iib mpox during the /epidemic in various study formats. vaccine efficacy exceeding % was reported after two doses. mrna in lipid‐nanoparticle encoding surface proteins from extracellular enveloped and intracellular mature virions of monkeypox virus induced humoral and cellular immune responses that protected macaques against mpox disease with clade i and ii viruses better than mva. only mixtures of monoclonal antibodies protected mice from mpox. the antiviral tecovirimat showed no efficacy in two clinical trials against clade i and ii mpox. abstract the figure shows examples of zoonotic diseases and their affected populations. the red arrows indicate the path of monkeypox virus infections first from a wild animal reservoir as a zoonosis mostly to children in central and west africa, followed by the /epidemic with human‐to‐human transmission in men having sex with men and in also with heterosexual transmission between humans. figure credit: this figure is excerpted from a us gao report gao‐‐: www.gao.gov/products/gao‐‐biosurveillance: nonfederal capabilities should be considered in creating a national biosurveillance strategy. in the public domain. introduction the monkeypox virus was isolated in in copenhagen. it belongs to the orthopoxvirus genus of the poxviridae family. mpxv infections were subsequently reported in monkeys from zoos and in a monkey colony maintained in a us pharma company. these observations led to the name monkeypox virus. the name is, however, a misnomer. mpxv has a broad animal host range, and the natural reservoir of this virus is squirrels and rodents from africa. in the early 1970s, the first human monkeypox disease cases were reported in the democratic republic of congo and in west africa, they occurred mostly in children. the viruses differed genetically, which led to the distinction of clade i and clade ii mpxv. the infections represented small clusters associated with bushmeat eating and were characterised by high mortality. the orthopoxvirus genus includes veterinary pathogens such as cowpox, camelpox, horsepox and mousepox viruses, vaccinia virus of unknown origin as well as one of the most dreaded viruses of human history, variola virus which caused smallpox. to verify whether the world health organisation smallpox vaccination and eradication campaign had achieved its goal, smallpox‐like skin eruptions were intensively investigated in the 1970s. no smallpox cases and only a few mpox cases were detected when screening more than million children from central and west africa for skin lesions. in the 1980s and 1990s, sporadic cases of clade i mpxv infections were reported in drc, suggesting that mpxv was endemic in central africa. the case fatality rate was particularly high in young children. in a small number of clade ii mpxv infections were observed in us citizens handling imported pet animals from africa. subsequently, mpxv infections developed a new dynamic, starting in with a clade ii mpxv epidemic in nigeria, which affected nearly subjects. the patients were mostly young male adults. the situation changed again and dramatically in when a new form of clade ii west african mpxv got transmitted among males having sex with males. a worldwide epidemic largely limited to the gay population started with clade ii mpxv in may and rapidly reached peak numbers with more than monthly cases in august . most cases were observed in america and europe. in july who declared mpox a public health emergency of international concern. after public alerts and information campaigns among msm networks and about mpox cases, case numbers dropped rapidly, and the pheic status of mpox was lifted in may . literature references and more detail for these earlier phases of the mpox epidemic can be found in a previous lilliput review. an upsurge of mpox cases with clade i mpxv in drc and its spread to neighbouring countries led who to declare mpox again a pheic on august . in the 21st century, only ebola has twice been declared a pheic. what had happened that who declared mpxv a pheic for a second time within years? the events leading to the second pheic alert for mpox in central drc, the annual incidence of mpox increased ‐fold between the 1980s and from .to per population, respectively. in mpox showed a clear association with ecological conditions: the annual incidence was and cases per population for forested, mixed and savannah areas, respectively. the average age of mpox cases was years. smallpox‐vaccinated persons had a fivefold lower risk of mpox as compared with unvaccinated persons, suggesting an % vaccine efficacy against mpox. the mpox incidence increase was attributed to the waning immunity of the smallpox vaccination campaign, which stopped in . the mpox situation in drc subsequently aggravated. a large consortium led by belgian and congolese epidemiologists counted clinically suspected mpox cases in drc between and . during this time period, the annual incidence quadrupled from to cases. children accounted for % of the cases. the overall cfr was .% and even higher in young children. mpox had a focus in central drc, but spread over time into many other drc provinces. the disease was nearly exclusively limited to rural areas, with a dominance of rainforest over savanna areas, and it displayed a trend for yearly seasonality. when limiting the analysis to laboratory‐confirmed cases, a comparable temporal increase in mpox was observed. about % of the pcr tests confirmed an orthopoxvirus infection. within the orthopoxvirus‐negative samples, % tested positive for varicella zoster virus. while this observation indicates an overestimation of mpox, this effect is more than compensated for by under‐reporting of mpox from low health care‐seeking behaviour in remote rural areas. the situation in drc is still accelerating: when suspected mpox cases were reported in the same number was already noted in the first half of . imported clade i cases have been reported in sweden and thailand. a further warning signal was a changing epidemiological situation: clusters of clade i mpxv in drc were transmitted by sexual contact. while sexual transmission was the rule for mpxv during the worldwide epidemic, this epidemic was caused by a clade iib mpxv. clade i mpxv was until recently not known to be sexually transmitted. in the past, most clade i mpxv infections occurred in children from remote drc villages. the children likely contracted the disease primarily from rodents. in september an mpox case was reported in the south kivu region of eastern drc, where mpox was not observed in the past. until february a total of further cases of mpox were reported in this region: % of the cases were young females, most of whom were sex workers. children constituted % of the cases. all patients showed a cutaneous rash; % had fever; % lymphadenopathy; and two died from mpox. mpxv genome analysis revealed a new clade i virus annotated as subclade ib. the analysis of the mutation pattern suggested human to human transmission and pointed to a recent origin of this mpxv subclade. the diagnostic mutation signal for human transmission was elevated tc>tt mutations driven by the human apolipoprotein b mrna‐editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide‐like proteins, causing cytosine deamination in viral genomes. absence of this mutation pattern indicates lack of exposure to human apobec‐activity and therefore suggests circulation of these mpxv isolates outside of the human population, representing likely animal to human transmission events. apobec3 genes have expanded in primates. by causing hypermutation in the viral genome, apobec3 represents a host‐mediated antiviral mechanism. apobec3 signals have already been observed during the worldwide /epidemic with clade iib viruses. the basic mpxv evolutionary rate in animals corresponds to nucleotide change per years. observing nucleotide substitutions during the /clade iib mpox epidemic is thus times higher than expected for circulation in an animal reservoir and likely reflected human‐to‐human transmission for clade iib since . mutations led during the worldwide clade iib epidemic to sub‐lineages a.b.and a.. clinical and epidemiological traits were then explored in a prospective observational study from a hospital in south kivu. from suspected mpox cases, % were laboratory‐confirmed mpxv infections; practically all belonged to subclade ib. adults accounted for the majority of cases; half of them were women, and only % of the patients were children. occupation‐wise, a quarter were male mine workers, and % were female sex workers. half of the adults reported transactional sex. most patients reported contact with suspected mpox cases, either sexually between adults or via close household contacts in children. contact of children with wild animals was rare. fatigue, malaise and myalgia were prodromal signs before the appearance of rash. genital rash accounted for half of the lesion counts; the median count was lesions, much higher than in the clade iib worldwide mpox epidemic. lymphadenopathy was high in adults and fourfold lower in children. the median hospitalisation duration was days; most cases were clinically mild or moderate. a third of the patients had moderate residual clinical signs months after hospitalisation. however, two paediatric patients had died, and four out of six pregnant women lost the fetus due to a transplacental infection. a high rate of fetal mpox infection was also observed in a prior study from central drc. from mpxv‐infected pregnant women, only one delivered a healthy baby; two had a miscarriage in the first trimester, and one had a macerated stillborn; the fetal tissues and the placenta showed high level mpxv replication. a review of the literature documented the outcome for further pregnancies in mpxv‐infected mothers. six fetal deaths were reported, and six delivered a healthy child. the outcome for three breastfed babies from mpxv‐infected lactating mothers was documented; all babies were infected, and one baby died. another study with suspected mpox cases from south kivu, investigated between october and february documented transmission mostly by heterosexual contact. homosexual contact accounted for only %. women represented % of the cases. these researchers noted a sequential change in mpox epidemiology over the last decades. from a zoonosis in people having wild animal contact, to limited human‐to‐human transmission in the early african phase, followed by a worldwide human‐to‐human transmission chain in msm to heterosexual mpox transmission in central africa. this sequence of events reminded the changing epidemiology seen with hiv infections. they warned that war and social unrest in eastern drc facilitated cross border infections and that the new infection has the potential for another global spread. in war in the kivu region induced people from drc to cross to uganda. burundi and rwanda which reported each cases after the second who pheic declaration. mpox cases were also, for the first time, observed in north kivu province of drc in a displaced person camp mediated by a close social, but non‐sexual, contact. for the time period to october mpox cases were observed in african countries. mortality was high with deaths indicating a cfr of .%. a .‐ to .‐fold increase in cases was observed over this time period for laboratory‐confirmed or clinically suspected mpox cases, respectively. drc was the most affected country. within drc, only four provinces provided high case numbers. no gender bias was seen, and half of the cases were in children. the most prevalent symptoms were cutaneous rash and fever. the current surge is caused mainly by clade ib mpxv against the background of ongoing clade ia transmission in central africa and clade iia in western africa. the authors asked for possible causes explaining the surge in mpox cases. one relevant factor was the young age of the population: % of the drc population is younger than years and has thus not received the smallpox vaccination, which provides cross‐protection to mpox. war, conflict, displacement, and a fragile health system also contributed to the mpox surge. it is currently not clear whether the genetic differences between clade i and clade ii viruses or their distinct transmission mechanisms explain the nearly ‐fold cfr difference between them. it should be noted that the cfr in drc was fivefold lower in laboratory‐confirmed than in clinically assessed mpox cases. furthermore, a cfr of .% was reported for burundi, uganda, rwanda, and kenya, regions that were only recently affected by clade ib, raising the question of whether epidemiological factors such as malnutrition, social upheaval, and hiv co‐infection, and not clade‐specific viral traits, have a greater effect on cfr. a comparison with smallpox might be helpful when assessing the impact of mpox epidemics. an annual maximum of smallpox cases, leading to deaths, was reported for drc in to who. this is in absolute terms lower than the mpox cases and deaths reported for drc in by clade i mpxv. however, cfr is higher for smallpox than for mpox. in contrast, by august the epidemic with clade iib sub‐lineage b1 caused cases and fatalities in countries. the attack rate among unvaccinated subjects living in a house with a primary mpox case was % compared to .% in a subject living in a neighbouring house, which is much lower than comparable rates seen in drc for smallpox, which ranged from % to %. viral genomics to differentiate mpox epidemics drc intensive sequencing of mpxv genomes has been done to assess the impact of viral traits versus epidemiological cofactors on disease severity and to differentiate distinct mpox epidemics, which might occur in parallel. in this vein, the viral genomes derived from mpox patients were sequenced. the patients were seeking medical help in drc between and . all sequences belonged to clade i mpxv as expected for mpox cases in central africa. notably, only genomes from south kivu province, collected in belonged to clade ib and showed little diversity. the remainder belonged to clade ia, which showed a ‐fold higher degree of genome diversity. five groups could be distinguished in clade ia viruses from drc. one was the most diverse and widespread and came from regions around the congo river, while others originated from the central province and the southern savannah areas, respectively. despite this geographical differentiation, co‐circulation of different clade ia groups was observed in several areas. in some districts, up to three different viral variants were detected at the same time. no particular apobec3 mutation enrichment signal was seen in clade ia viral genomes. this observation concurs with the traditional paradigm of zoonotic spillover events with limited human‐to‐human transmission. the genetic diversity between clade ia strains from drc suggests multiple interspecies transmission events, raising the question of the animal reservoirs from where mpxv infections entered the human population. in contrast, clade ib viruses were restricted to recent samples of low genetic diversity from the kivu province and showed a fivefold higher apobec3 mutation signal than clade ia, supporting the interpre